SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … ranging from severe neurodevelopmental disorders to adult-onset CharcotMarie-Tooth disease. Functional studies show that DHX9 variants disrupt DHX9 cellular localization and …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[2] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 variants is also beginning to emerge [27,28]. Clinical data for individuals carrying variants in DDX6 [25], EIF4A2 [24], or …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[3] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … in the winged helix and the C-terminal RGG domains of DHX9 which associate with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (also known as Charcot–Marie Tooth type 2 disease). …

[4] O18: Deciphering DHX9 gene pathogenicity in neurological disorders with distinct phenotypes
    T Guo, C Wang, L Gong, D Calame, J Lupski… (2026)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2949774426008150
    snippet: … Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) encompass a spectrum of conditions affecting brain … type 2 Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) - a distal symmetric peripheral polyneuropathy. DHX9, an …

[5] GREGoR: accelerating genomics for rare diseases
    M Dawood, B Heavner, MM Wheeler, RA Ungar… (2025)
    PMID:41224980 DOI:10.1038/s41586-025-09613-8 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09613-8
    snippet: … RNU4-2 has now served as a seed for more RNU4minor spliceosome genes being implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders84,85. Another example from GREGoR is CHASERR, a …
    abstract: Rare diseases are collectively common, affecting approximately 1 in 20 individuals worldwide. In recent years, rapid progress has been made in rare disease diagnostics due to advances in next-generation sequencing, development of new computational and functional genomics approaches to prioritize genes and variants and increased global sharing of clinical and genetic data. However, more than half of individuals suspected to have a rare disease lack a genetic diagnosis. The Genomics Research to Elucidate the Genetics of Rare Diseases (GREGoR) Consortium was initiated to study thousands of challenging rare disease cases and families and apply, standardize and evaluate emerging genomics technologies and analytics to accelerate their adoption in clinical practice. Furthermore, all data generated, currently representing over 7,500 individuals from over 3,000 families, are rapidly made available to researchers worldwide through the Analysis, Visualization and Informatics Lab-space (AnVIL) to catalyse global efforts to develop approaches for genetic diagnoses in rare diseases. Most of these families have undergone previous clinical genetic testing but remained unsolved, with most being exome-negative. Here we describe the collaborative research framework, datasets and discoveries comprising GREGoR that will provide foundational resources and substrates for the future of rare disease genomics.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ... - PubMed
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37467750 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.013 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37467750/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — ... neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] DHX9 - New Candidate Gene for Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41873535 DOI:10.1158/1535-7163.mct-25-1196 https://www.infrafrontier.eu/news/dhx9-new-candidate-gene-for-neurodevelopmental-disorders-and-charcot-marie-tooth-disease/
    snippet: DHX9 – New Candidate Gene for Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease ... Calame DG et al. Monoallelic variation in ...
    abstract: Recurrent high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) and endometrial cancer remain major clinical challenges with limited effective treatment options. DExH-box helicase 9 (DHX9), a DNA/RNA helicase essential for genomic stability, has not yet been explored as a therapeutic target in gynecologic cancers. In this study, we show that a selective DHX9 inhibitor (DHX9i) suppresses proliferation in a subset of HGSOC and endometrial cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, chromosomal instability, and mitotic failure. This effect was independent of microsatellite instability status and prior resistance to platinum or PARP inhibitors. Genomic analysis indicated that DHX9i resistance was unlikely to be driven by single-gene mutations but was instead associated with copy-number alterations in mitotic spindle and microtubule-regulating genes in both HGSOC and endometrial cancer. Transcriptomic profiling further revealed consistent alterations in microtubule- and spindle-associated pathways in DHX9i-resistant models following DHX9i treatment. Mechanistically, DHX9i induced mitotic defects in DHX9i-sensitive models, whereas resistant lines maintained mitotic integrity. Given the convergence of resistance-associated features on microtubule-related pathways, we combined DHX9i with the microtubule-stabilizing agent paclitaxel to enhance mitotic stress. This combination triggered mitotic disruption and enhanced cytotoxicity in DHX9i-resistant cells. In vivo, the combination led to sustained tumor regression and prolonged survival in both DHX9i-sensitive and DHX9i-resistant models without notable toxicity. Overall, our findings define genomic, transcriptomic, and phenotypic characteristics associated with differential responses to DHX9i and support the clinical evaluation of the DHX9i-paclitaxel combination as a therapeutic strategy in recurrent gynecologic cancers.

[8] Article Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929723002148
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Author links open overlay panelDaniel G. Calame, Tianyu Guo ...

[9] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text
    snippet: ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. View ORCID ProfileDaniel G. Calame, Tianyu Guo, Chen Wang ...

[10] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://discovery.geisinger.org/esploro/outputs/journalArticle/Monoallelic-variation-in-DHX9-the-gene/9913601209631
    snippet: ... Calame ... neurodevelopmental disorders to adult-onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.