SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the TFIIIC2 complex are associated with neurodevelopmental phenotypes in humans and zebrafish
    MS Abdel (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/7/1/fcaf055/8002734
    snippet: … bone age, skeletal anomalies, dental anomalies and predominant cerebellar atrophy, similar to the brain imaging features observed in some of the patients described in this study. …
    abstract: RNA polymerase III transcribes essential non-coding RNAs, a process regulated by transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC. Although germline variants in TFIIIC subunit genes have been described in a few patients with neurodevelopmental disorders, the associated pathogenesis and clinical spectrum are not yet well defined. Herein, we describe the identification of biallelic variants in <i>GTF3C3,</i> which encodes a key component of the TFIIIC subunit, in four patients from three unrelated families of different ethnicities collected through GeneMatcher. The patients exhibited microcephaly, developmental delay, intellectual disability and distinctive dysmorphic facies that appear recognizable in very young children. Their brain imaging showed brain atrophy with predominant cerebellar involvement, as well as hypoplasia of the frontal lobes and one patient had moderate to severe simplified gyral pattern. Seizures were observed in half of the patients. Exome/genome sequencing revealed four different <i>GTF3C3</i> variants including three missense (p.Cys172Gly, p.Val427Phe and p.Ala509Thr) and one nonsense variant (p.Arg717Ter). Missense variants were not present in known genetic databases and occurred in highly conserved residues. Knockout of the <i>GTF3C3</i> ortholog in zebrafish recapitulated the key clinical symptoms including microcephaly, brain anomalies and seizure susceptibility. We also observed reduced RNA polymerase III target gene expression in the zebrafish knockout model. This study describes a new neurodevelopmental syndrome in humans and zebrafish associated with biallelic <i>GTF3C3</i> variants and underscores the need for further research into the biological impacts of variants in TFIIIC-linked genes and their contribution to RNA polymerase III-related pathologies.

[2] Case report: Characterization of a patient with novel biallelic variants in GTF3C3 and comprehensive review of previously reported cases
    L López (2026)
    DOI:10.3389/fgene.2026.1860633/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/genetics/articles/10.3389/fgene.2026.1860633/full
    snippet: … GTF3C3 variants in a new patient, who also represents the oldest reported individual so far. We detail the genotype and phenotype … delineates the phenotype associated with GTF3C3. …

[3] Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 result in an autosomal recessive disorder with intellectual disability
    L De Hayr, LER Blok, KR Dias, J Long, A Begemann… (2025)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360024001874
    snippet: … cerebellar atrophy with simplified gyral pattern and hypoplastic frontal lobes bilaterally at age 15y 11m Cerebellar atrophy, … between GTF3C3 loss of function and the clinical phenotypes …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>This study details a novel syndromic form of autosomal recessive intellectual disability resulting from recessive variants in GTF3C3, encoding a key component of the DNA-binding transcription factor IIIC, which has a conserved role in RNA polymerase III-mediated transcription.<h4>Methods</h4>Exome sequencing, minigene analysis, molecular modeling, RNA polymerase III reporter gene assays, and Drosophila knockdown models were utilized to characterize GTF3C3 variants.<h4>Results</h4>Twelve affected individuals from 7 unrelated families were identified with homozygous or compound heterozygous missense variants in GTF3C3 including c.503C>T p.(Ala168Val), c.1268T>C p.(Leu423Pro), c.1436A>G p.(Tyr479Cys), c.2419C>T p.(Arg807Cys), and c.2420G>A p.(Arg807His). The cohort presented with intellectual disability, variable nonfamilial facial features, motor impairments, seizures, and cerebellar/corpus callosum malformations. Consistent with disruptions in intra- and intermolecular interactions observed in molecular modeling, RNA polymerase III reporter assays confirmed that the majority of missense variants resulted in a loss of function. Minigene analysis of the recurrent c.503C>T p.(Ala168Val) variant confirmed the introduction of a cryptic donor site into exon 4, resulting in mRNA missplicing. Consistent with the clinical features of this cohort, neuronal loss of Gtf3c3 in Drosophila induced seizure-like behavior, motor impairment, and learning deficits.<h4>Conclusion</h4>These findings confirm that GTF3C3 variants result in an autosomal recessive form of syndromic intellectual disability.

[4] Biallelic variants in GTF3C5, a regulator of RNA polymerase III-mediated transcription, cause a multisystem developmental disorder
    A Iwata (2024)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-024-02656-3 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-024-02656-3
    snippet: … G) demonstrated diffuse cerebellar atrophy (arrows, … GTF3C3 have variable phenotypes, such as developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, ataxia, cardiac anomalies, cerebellar atrophy…
    abstract: General transcription factor IIIC subunit 5 (GTF3C5) encodes transcription factor IIIC63 (TFIIIC63). It binds to DNA to recruit another transcription factor, TFIIIB, and RNA polymerase III (Pol III) to mediate the transcription of small noncoding RNAs, such as tRNAs. Here, we report four individuals from three families presenting with a multisystem developmental disorder phenotype with biallelic variants in GTF3C5. The overlapping features include growth retardation, developmental delay, intellectual disability, dental anomalies, cerebellar malformations, delayed bone age, skeletal anomalies, and facial dysmorphism. Using lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from two affected individuals, we observed a reduction in TFIIIC63 protein levels compared to control LCLs. Genome binding of TFIIIC63 protein is also reduced in LCL from one of the affected individuals. Additionally, approximately 40% of Pol III binding regions exhibited reduction in the level of Pol III occupancy in the mutant genome relative to the control, while approximately 54% of target regions showed comparable levels of Pol III occupancy between the two, indicating partial impairment of Pol III occupancy in the mutant genome. Yeasts with subject-specific variants showed temperature sensitivity and impaired growth, supporting the notion that the identified variants have deleterious effects. gtf3c5 mutant zebrafish showed developmental defects, including a smaller body, head, and eyes. Taken together, our data show that GTF3C5 plays an important role in embryonic development, and that biallelic variants in this gene cause a multisystem developmental disorder. Our study adds GTF3C5-related disorder to the growing list of genetic disorders associated with Pol III transcription machinery.

[5] White matter disorders at the intersection of transcription, RNA processing and translation
    A Chapleau, F Villa Tobón, G Bernard (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41582-026-01248-1
    snippet: … clinical and radiological phenotypes, and highlight emerging … All four individuals exhibited cerebellar atrophy on brain MRI … of the TFIIIC complex (GTF3C5and GTF3C3), a key initiator of …
    abstract: Hereditary white matter disorders, encompassing leukodystrophies and genetically determined leukoencephalopathies, are a heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by white matter signal abnormalities on neuroimaging. An increasing number of these disorders are now associated with defects in genes that encode proteins involved in transcription, RNA processing and translation. Pathogenic variants in these genes disrupt fundamental processes of the central dogma yet manifest primarily as neurological diseases, often presenting with diverse clinical and radiological features. Although many of these conditions have been recognized for over a decade, their underlying pathophysiological mechanisms and the selective vulnerability of the CNS and myelin remain incompletely understood. Here we provide a comprehensive overview of white matter disorders arising from defects in protein biosynthesis pathways. We summarize known disease-causing genes and their molecular consequences and associated clinical and radiological phenotypes, and highlight emerging mechanistic themes and therapeutic strategies across this expanding class of disorders.

[6] Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the TFIIIC2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11878552 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11878552/
    snippet: by MS Abdel-Hamid · 2025 · Cited by 5 — In addition, GTF3C3 biallelic variant have been described in four affected individuals with developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, ataxia, cerebellar atrophy ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase III transcribes essential non-coding RNAs, a process regulated by transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC. Although germline variants in TFIIIC subunit genes have been described in a few patients with neurodevelopmental disorders, the associated pathogenesis and clinical spectrum are not yet well defined. Herein, we describe the identification of biallelic variants in <i>GTF3C3,</i> which encodes a key component of the TFIIIC subunit, in four patients from three unrelated families of different ethnicities collected through GeneMatcher. The patients exhibited microcephaly, developmental delay, intellectual disability and distinctive dysmorphic facies that appear recognizable in very young children. Their brain imaging showed brain atrophy with predominant cerebellar involvement, as well as hypoplasia of the frontal lobes and one patient had moderate to severe simplified gyral pattern. Seizures were observed in half of the patients. Exome/genome sequencing revealed four different <i>GTF3C3</i> variants including three missense (p.Cys172Gly, p.Val427Phe and p.Ala509Thr) and one nonsense variant (p.Arg717Ter). Missense variants were not present in known genetic databases and occurred in highly conserved residues. Knockout of the <i>GTF3C3</i> ortholog in zebrafish recapitulated the key clinical symptoms including microcephaly, brain anomalies and seizure susceptibility. We also observed reduced RNA polymerase III target gene expression in the zebrafish knockout model. This study describes a new neurodevelopmental syndrome in humans and zebrafish associated with biallelic <i>GTF3C3</i> variants and underscores the need for further research into the biological impacts of variants in TFIIIC-linked genes and their contribution to RNA polymerase III-related pathologies.

[7] Identified variants in GTF3C5 and clinical phenotype of the ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Identified-variants-in-GTF3C5-and-clinical-phenotype-of-the-Subjects-1-and-2-A_fig1_379225074
    snippet: ... cerebellar atrophy (arrows, E and F) with a relatively hyperintensity of the ... Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the TFIIIC2 complex ...

[8] Activity
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/activity/?panel=250&entity=ATR
    snippet: Phenotype included developmental delay, intellectual disability, microcephaly, cerebellar atrophy ... Brain MRI demonstrated cerebellar atrophy. Extensive work-up ...

[9] The role of recessive inheritance in early-onset epileptic encephalopathies: a combined whole-exome sequencing and copy number study
    SM Papuc, L Abela, K Steindl, A Begemann… (2019)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-018-0299-8
    snippet: … , muscle tone abnormalities, and variable brain abnormalities such as … and cerebellar hypoplasia) [46, 47]. Thus, we consider GTF3C3 as a candidate for neurodevelopmental disorders …
    abstract: Early-onset epileptic encephalopathy (EE) and combined developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEE) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous severely devastating conditions. Recent studies emphasized de novo variants as major underlying cause suggesting a generally low-recurrence risk. In order to better understand the full genetic landscape of EE and DEE, we performed high-resolution chromosomal microarray analysis in combination with whole-exome sequencing in 63 deeply phenotyped independent patients. After bioinformatic filtering for rare variants, diagnostic yield was improved for recessive disorders by manual data curation as well as molecular modeling of missense variants and untargeted plasma-metabolomics in selected patients. In total, we yielded a diagnosis in ∼42% of cases with causative copy number variants in 6 patients (∼10%) and causative sequence variants in 16 established disease genes in 20 patients (∼32%), including compound heterozygosity for causative sequence and copy number variants in one patient. In total, 38% of diagnosed cases were caused by recessive genes, of which two cases escaped automatic calling due to one allele occurring de novo. Notably, we found the recessive gene SPATA5 causative in as much as 3% of our cohort, indicating that it may have been underdiagnosed in previous studies. We further support candidacy for neurodevelopmental disorders of four previously described genes (PIK3AP1, GTF3C3, UFC1, and WRAP53), three of which also followed a recessive inheritance pattern. Our results therefore confirm the importance of de novo causative gene variants in EE/DEE, but additionally illustrate the major role of mostly compound heterozygous or hemizygous recessive inheritance and consequently high-recurrence risk.

[10] Expanding the genetic heterogeneity of intellectual disability
    S Anazi, S Maddirevula, V Salpietro, YT Asi, S Alsahli… (2017)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-017-1843-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-017-1843-2
    snippet: … from the frontal cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum of normal adult brains were used. … consanguineous families with neurodevelopmental disorders. JAMA Psychiatry 74:293–299 …
    abstract: Intellectual disability (ID) is a common morbid condition with a wide range of etiologies. The list of monogenic forms of ID has increased rapidly in recent years thanks to the implementation of genomic sequencing techniques. In this study, we describe the phenotypic and genetic findings of 68 families (105 patients) all with novel ID-related variants. In addition to established ID genes, including ones for which we describe unusual mutational mechanism, some of these variants represent the first confirmatory disease-gene links following previous reports (TRAK1, GTF3C3, SPTBN4 and NKX6-2), some of which were based on single families. Furthermore, we describe novel variants in 14 genes that we propose as novel candidates (ANKHD1, ASTN2, ATP13A1, FMO4, MADD, MFSD11, NCKAP1, NFASC, PCDHGA10, PPP1R21, SLC12A2, SLK, STK32C and ZFAT). We highlight MADD and PCDHGA10 as particularly compelling candidates in which we identified biallelic likely deleterious variants in two independent ID families each. We also highlight NCKAP1 as another compelling candidate in a large family with autosomal dominant mild intellectual disability that fully segregates with a heterozygous truncating variant. The candidacy of NCKAP1 is further supported by its biological function, and our demonstration of relevant expression in human brain. Our study expands the locus and allelic heterogeneity of ID and demonstrates the power of positional mapping to reveal unusual mutational mechanisms.