SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1
    D Tonduti, I Dorboz, A Imbard, A Slama… (2015)
    DOI:10.1186/s13023-015-0237-6 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13023-015-0237-6
    snippet: … Electrophysiological studies performed at 18 years of age (… On our patient, NFU1 mutations result in a severe PDH defect … suggest the possibility that the neuropathy in this patient may …
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[2] A complicated intrathecal baclofen pump implantation in a child with spastic Diplegia: Should a genetic mimic of cerebral palsy be Considered?
    MA Mahmoud, PE Khalil, OF ElRashidi… (2025)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214751925001252
    snippet: … NFU1 mutations enclose a spectrum of diseases ranging from milder pure Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia … , which was suggested by the electrophysiological studies and CSF analysis. …

[3] Mitochondrial diseases related to mtDNA in childhood: genotype-phenotype correlation and characterization of novel phenotypes
    A Ardissone (2020)
    https://boa.unimib.it/handle/10281/262917
    snippet: … IBA57 mutated patients presenting spastic paraplegia, and in these … with cysts and hyperglycinemia may result from NFU1 … Electrophysiological examinations showed bilateral …

[4] A decade of whole-exome sequencing in Brazilian Neurology: from past insights to future perspectives
    CRDAC Quaio, TYT Silva, OG Barsottini… (2025)
    PMID:40360003 DOI:10.1055/s-0045-1807715 https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/ejournals/html/10.1055/s-0045-1807715
    snippet: … ,[44] hereditary spastic paraplegia,[45] and distal hereditary motor neuropathy with upper neuron … families with complex, heterogeneous hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) phenotypes, …
    abstract: Over the last decade, whole-exome sequencing (WES) has become a standard diagnostic tool, significantly transforming the landscape of clinical genetics and playing a pivotal role in the diagnosis of neurogenetic diseases. This revolutionary shift has left a lasting impact on the field of neurology in Brazil. The current review article examines key developments and milestones achieved in Brazil through the application of WES in neurology and discusses forthcoming challenges and essential steps to advance molecular diagnosis. Several studies report the use of WES to diagnose genetic disorders with neurological manifestations in Brazil, underscoring the growing importance of molecular diagnosis in neurogenetics. These studies often provide detailed phenotypic analyses and clinical descriptions, offering valuable insights into the genetic underpinnings of several neurological conditions. Many reports highlight the use of WES in the investigation of complex neurological conditions in Brazil, such as neurodevelopmental disorders, hereditary spastic paraplegia, movement disorders, and ataxia. The discovery of new genes implicated in monogenic diseases with neurological manifestations through WES was a significant breakthrough. Despite these advances, the availability of large cohort studies on rare diseases in Brazil remains limited, hindering the ability to generalize findings and explore the full spectrum of genetic diversity. However, a few larger cohort studies have substantially contributed to our understanding of rare diseases and specific neurological disorders.While WES has limitations and may eventually be supplanted by more advanced diagnostic tools, it left a permanent mark on the neurology field in Brazil. The field of neurogenetics is set to become increasingly important in the future.

[5] European Journal of Paediatric Neurology
    L Lagae, A Arzimanoglou, SM Zuberi (2013)
    PMID:42378768 DOI:10.1016/j.ejpn.2026.06.009 https://www.epns.info/documents/MEM_EPNS_abstracts_2013.pdf
    snippet: … Sensory and motor axonal neuropathy was detected in 4 … better characterize the electrophysiological characteristics of patients … Molecular analysis of the NFU1 gene revealed one …

[6] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC4333890 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4333890/
    snippet: by D Tonduti · 2015 · Cited by 38 — New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1. Davide Tonduti ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[7] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://europepmc.org/article/pmc/4333890
    snippet: by D Tonduti · 2015 · Cited by 37 — New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1. ... A subacute demyelinating mixed motor sensory neuropathy, never yet reported ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[8] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1
    (authors not shown)
    https://d-nb.info/1239172095/34
    snippet: Keywords: Irons sulfur clusters, Leukoencephalopathy, Spastic paraplegia, NFU1 ... severe mixed motor-sensory neuropathy on lower limbs. ... EEG: ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[9] SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/182600
    snippet: A number sign (#) is used with this entry because autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia-3A (SPG3A) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the ATL1 gene ...

[10] 620938 - SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 93, AUTOSOMAL ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620938
    snippet: autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia-93 (SPG93) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the NFU1 gene (608100) neuropathy of the lower ...