SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] White matter disorders at the intersection of transcription, RNA processing and translation
    A Chapleau, F Villa Tobón, G Bernard (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41582-026-01248-1
    snippet: … tial and permanent lack of myelination, presenting as diffuse … of the TFIIIC complex (GTF3C5and GTF3C3), a key initiator of Pol … matter hyperintensities, corpus callosum hypoplasia and …
    abstract: Hereditary white matter disorders, encompassing leukodystrophies and genetically determined leukoencephalopathies, are a heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by white matter signal abnormalities on neuroimaging. An increasing number of these disorders are now associated with defects in genes that encode proteins involved in transcription, RNA processing and translation. Pathogenic variants in these genes disrupt fundamental processes of the central dogma yet manifest primarily as neurological diseases, often presenting with diverse clinical and radiological features. Although many of these conditions have been recognized for over a decade, their underlying pathophysiological mechanisms and the selective vulnerability of the CNS and myelin remain incompletely understood. Here we provide a comprehensive overview of white matter disorders arising from defects in protein biosynthesis pathways. We summarize known disease-causing genes and their molecular consequences and associated clinical and radiological phenotypes, and highlight emerging mechanistic themes and therapeutic strategies across this expanding class of disorders.

[2] Pathogenic variants in BORCS5 cause a spectrum of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders with lysosomal dysfunction
    NE Mencacci, G Minakaki, R Maroofian… (2026)
    PMID:42012897 DOI:10.1172/jci195336 https://www.jci.org/articles/view/195336
    snippet: … The myelination is markedly reduced or incomplete in all cases. The corpus callosum is … In F-VIII:1 and F-IX:1, the corpus callosum is also short and dysplastic. There is atrophy of the …
    abstract: BORCS5 encodes a subunit of the BLOC-One-Related Complex (BORC), which is known to promote anterograde movement and fusion of lysosomes. We identified 16 individuals from 9 families with bi-allelic BORCS5 variants, revealing a spectrum of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative phenotypes. Carriers of homozygous protein-truncating variants (PTVs), resulting in complete loss of BORCS5, presented with prenatally lethal arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, brain malformations, and neuropathological evidence of neuroaxonal dystrophy. Individuals with missense or splice-site variants presented differently, with microcephaly, developmental epileptic encephalopathy, optic atrophy, spasticity, and progressive movement disorders. In this group, brain MRI showed diffuse hypomyelination, corpus callosum abnormalities, and progressive global cerebral atrophy, consistent with neurodegeneration. Borcs5 KO in zebrafish resulted in microcephaly, motor deficits, and increased seizure susceptibility, mirroring the patients' clinical presentation. At the cellular level, only BORCS5 PTVs, but not missense variants, led to perinuclear lysosomal clustering and impaired lysosomal axonal trafficking in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived forebrain neurons. However, PTVs and missense variants were associated with reduced lysosomal proteolysis and activity of lysosomal hydrolases glucocerebrosidase and cathepsin B, indicating lysosomal dysfunction. Our study reveals a role for BORCS5 in modulation of lysosomal function, in addition to its known role in lysosome movement and fusion, possibly underlying the diverse clinical manifestations in individuals with BORCS5-related disorders.

[3] Krüppel-like factor 6 is required for oligodendrocyte differentiation and CNS myelination
    BM Laitman (2016)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/7413e8584d586913b04758cae3736858/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750
    snippet: Growth factors of the gp130 family promote oligodendrocyte differentiation and viability, and myelination, but their mechanisms of action are incompletely understood. Here, we show …

[4] The Genomics of Intellectual Disability
    KR Dias (2023)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/0856f755708b7d8d2584ab36dea072fc/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2026366&diss=y
    snippet: … In this thesis,evidence for two novel ID genes, ZMYND8 and GTF3C3, is presented using an array of in silico and functional studies. Human neural organoids most closely recapitulate …

[5] The role of recessive inheritance in early-onset epileptic encephalopathies: a combined whole-exome sequencing and copy number study
    SM Papuc, L Abela, K Steindl, A Begemann… (2019)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-018-0299-8
    snippet: … such as delayed myelination, thin corpus callosum or cerebellar … Furthermore, the yeast ortholog of GTF3C3, Tfc4, has been shown to … Thus, we consider GTF3C3 as a candidate for …
    abstract: Early-onset epileptic encephalopathy (EE) and combined developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEE) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous severely devastating conditions. Recent studies emphasized de novo variants as major underlying cause suggesting a generally low-recurrence risk. In order to better understand the full genetic landscape of EE and DEE, we performed high-resolution chromosomal microarray analysis in combination with whole-exome sequencing in 63 deeply phenotyped independent patients. After bioinformatic filtering for rare variants, diagnostic yield was improved for recessive disorders by manual data curation as well as molecular modeling of missense variants and untargeted plasma-metabolomics in selected patients. In total, we yielded a diagnosis in ∼42% of cases with causative copy number variants in 6 patients (∼10%) and causative sequence variants in 16 established disease genes in 20 patients (∼32%), including compound heterozygosity for causative sequence and copy number variants in one patient. In total, 38% of diagnosed cases were caused by recessive genes, of which two cases escaped automatic calling due to one allele occurring de novo. Notably, we found the recessive gene SPATA5 causative in as much as 3% of our cohort, indicating that it may have been underdiagnosed in previous studies. We further support candidacy for neurodevelopmental disorders of four previously described genes (PIK3AP1, GTF3C3, UFC1, and WRAP53), three of which also followed a recessive inheritance pattern. Our results therefore confirm the importance of de novo causative gene variants in EE/DEE, but additionally illustrate the major role of mostly compound heterozygous or hemizygous recessive inheritance and consequently high-recurrence risk.

[6] Western blot analysis of the cortex, corpus callosum, and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Western-blot-analysis-of-the-cortex-corpus-callosum-and-spinal-cord-extracts-from_fig4_354911406
    snippet: These observations support the view that the myelination defects in the corpus callosum reside in cells of the OL ... ... GTF3C3 and GTF3C5, respectively ...

[7] Pathogenic variants in BORCS5 cause a spectrum of ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:42012897 DOI:10.1172/jci195336 PMC13221227 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13221227/
    snippet: by NE Mencacci · 2026 · Cited by 6 — The myelination is markedly reduced or incomplete in all cases. The corpus callosum is very thin in all individuals (thick arrows) with associated hypoplastic ...
    abstract: BORCS5 encodes a subunit of the BLOC-One-Related Complex (BORC), which is known to promote anterograde movement and fusion of lysosomes. We identified 16 individuals from 9 families with bi-allelic BORCS5 variants, revealing a spectrum of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative phenotypes. Carriers of homozygous protein-truncating variants (PTVs), resulting in complete loss of BORCS5, presented with prenatally lethal arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, brain malformations, and neuropathological evidence of neuroaxonal dystrophy. Individuals with missense or splice-site variants presented differently, with microcephaly, developmental epileptic encephalopathy, optic atrophy, spasticity, and progressive movement disorders. In this group, brain MRI showed diffuse hypomyelination, corpus callosum abnormalities, and progressive global cerebral atrophy, consistent with neurodegeneration. Borcs5 KO in zebrafish resulted in microcephaly, motor deficits, and increased seizure susceptibility, mirroring the patients' clinical presentation. At the cellular level, only BORCS5 PTVs, but not missense variants, led to perinuclear lysosomal clustering and impaired lysosomal axonal trafficking in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived forebrain neurons. However, PTVs and missense variants were associated with reduced lysosomal proteolysis and activity of lysosomal hydrolases glucocerebrosidase and cathepsin B, indicating lysosomal dysfunction. Our study reveals a role for BORCS5 in modulation of lysosomal function, in addition to its known role in lysosome movement and fusion, possibly underlying the diverse clinical manifestations in individuals with BORCS5-related disorders.

[8] Pathogenic variants in BORCS5 Cause a Spectrum of ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.04.30.25326597v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.04.30.25326597v1.full-text
    snippet: The myelination is markedly reduced/incomplete in all cases. The corpus callosum ... Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the ...

[9] Activity
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/activity/?panel=250&entity=ATR
    snippet: Two other TFIIIC subunits, GTF3C3 and GTF3C5, have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders. ... corpus callosum hypoplasia and brain microcalcifications.

[10] Gene: CLCN3 (Early onset or syndromic epilepsy)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/402/gene/CLCN3/
    snippet: ... corpus callosum (6/9), disorganized cerebellar folia (4/9), delayed myelination (3/9), decreased white matter volume (3/9), pons hypoplasia (3/9), and ...