SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A mouse model of autosomal dominant spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a mutation in Tuba4a
    TJ Hines, JR Funke, SL Pratt, AD Rice, JL Twiss… (2026)
    PMC13014175 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13014175/
    snippet: … The Tuba4a Q176P mice have profound ataxia with Purkinje … Ataxia and cerebellar atrophy were also observed in two … in the Tuba4a Q176P mice, but nearly all Purkinje cells are …
    abstract: Hereditary ataxias are a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by impaired balance and coordination, often due to cerebellar dysfunction. Despite advances in identifying genetic causes, animal models remain essential for dissecting underlying mechanisms and testing therapeutic strategies. Here we describe a mouse model of spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a missense mutation in Tuba4a (n.A626C, p.Gln176Pro). In an ENU mutagenesis screen, a male C57BL/6 J mouse exhibiting muscle wasting and an intention tremor starting at approximately 4 weeks-of-age was identified. The male was bred by in vitro fertilization to BALB/cByJ oocyte donors. Genetic mapping determined dominant inheritance and localized the mutation to Chromosome 1. Genome sequencing revealed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in serine threonine kinase 36 (Stk36Y1003N) and alpha-tubulin 4A (Tuba4aQ176P) in the mapping interval. These SNPs were CRISPR-engineered into C57BL/6 J mice, which confirmed the Tuba4aQ176P variant as the causative mutation. Mutant mice are normal at 3 weeks, except for decrement in muscle response following repetitive nerve stimulation. However, by 30 days these mice have overt ataxia, Purkinje neuron degeneration, and extensive skeletal muscle defects, which contribute to a decreased lifespan. Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia type 11 (SPAX11), congenital myopathy type 26 (CMYO26), and frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 9 (FTDALS9). Our mice exhibit hallmark features of SPAX11 and CMYO26, but do not show motor neuron degeneration. This specificity makes this model a valuable tool for studying cell-type selective effects of TUBA4A mutations in neurodegeneration and myopathy.

[2] Microtubule dysfunction: a common feature of neurodegenerative diseases
    A Sferra, F Nicita, E Bertini (2020)
    https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/21/19/7354
    snippet: … spastic ataxia and sensory motor axonal neuropathy [94]. … Mutant TUBA4A harboring the W407X substitution shows … abnormal tubulin polyglutamylation, cerebellar atrophy, and the …
    abstract: Neurons are particularly susceptible to microtubule (MT) defects and deregulation of the MT cytoskeleton is considered to be a common insult during the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. Evidence that dysfunctions in the MT system have a direct role in neurodegeneration comes from findings that several forms of neurodegenerative diseases are associated with changes in genes encoding tubulins, the structural units of MTs, MT-associated proteins (MAPs), or additional factors such as MT modifying enzymes which modulating tubulin post-translational modifications (PTMs) regulate MT functions and dynamics. Efforts to use MT-targeting therapeutic agents for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases are underway. Many of these agents have provided several benefits when tested on both in vitro and in vivo neurodegenerative model systems. Currently, the most frequently addressed therapeutic interventions include drugs that modulate MT stability or that target tubulin PTMs, such as tubulin acetylation. The purpose of this review is to provide an update on the relevance of MT dysfunctions to the process of neurodegeneration and briefly discuss advances in the use of MT-targeting drugs for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

[3] The molecular landscape of hereditary ataxia: a single-center study
    E Bregant, E Betto, C Dal Secco, J Zucco, F Baldan… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-025-02744-y https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-025-02744-y
    snippet: … Indeed, patients displaying pure cerebellar ataxia, spastic ataxia and ataxia with peripheral … old male diagnosed with ataxic gait, cerebellar atrophy, unilateral hearing loss and cognitive …
    abstract: Hereditary ataxia (HA) is a heterogeneous group of complex neurological disorders, which represent a diagnostic challenge due to their diverse phenotypes and genetic etiologies. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized the field of neurogenetics, improving the identification of ataxia-associated genes. Notwithstanding, repeat expansions analysis remains a cornerstone in the diagnostic workflow of these diseases. Here we describe the molecular characterization of a consecutive single-center series of 70 patients with genetically uncharacterized HA. Patients' samples were analyzed for known HA-associated repeat expansions as first tier and negative ones were analyzed by whole exome sequencing (WES) as second tier. Overall, we identified pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in 40% (n = 28/70) and variants of unknown significance (VUS) in 20% (n = 14/70) of cases. In particular, 10 patients (14.3%, n = 10/70) presented pathogenic repeat expansions while 18 cases (30%, n = 18/60) harbored at least a single nucleotide variant (SNV) or a copy number variant (CNV) in HA or HSP-related genes. WES allowed assessing complex neurological diseases (i.e., leukodystrophies, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis and atypical xeroderma pigmentosum), which are not usually referred as pure genetic ataxias. Our data suggests that the combined use of repeat expansion analysis and WES, coupled to detailed clinical phenotyping, is able to detect the molecular alteration underpinning ataxia in almost 50% cases, regardless of the hereditary pattern. Indeed, NGS-based tests are fundamental to acknowledge novel HA-associated genes useful to explain the remaining wide fraction of negative tests. Nowadays, this gap is problematic since these patients could not benefit from an etiological diagnosis of their disease that allows prognostic trajectories and prenatal/preimplantation diagnosis.

[4] Multi-omic profiling reveals the ataxia protein sacsin is required for integrin trafficking and synaptic organization
    LEL Romano, WY Aw, KM Hixson, TV Novoselova… (2022)
    PMID:36323248 DOI:10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111580 https://www.cell.com/cell-reports/fulltext/S2211-1247(22)01441-3
    snippet: … Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a childhood-onset neurological disease characterized by pyramidal spasticity, cerebellar ataxia, and Purkinje …
    abstract: Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a childhood-onset cerebellar ataxia caused by mutations in SACS, which encodes the protein sacsin. Cellular ARSACS phenotypes include mitochondrial dysfunction, intermediate filament disorganization, and progressive death of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. It is unclear why the loss of sacsin causes these deficits or why they manifest as cerebellar ataxia. Here, we perform multi-omic profiling in sacsin knockout (KO) cells and identify alterations in microtubule dynamics and mislocalization of focal adhesion (FA) proteins, including multiple integrins. Deficits in FA structure, signaling, and function can be rescued by targeting PTEN, a negative regulator of FA signaling. ARSACS mice possess mislocalization of ITGA1 in Purkinje neurons and synaptic disorganization in the deep cerebellar nucleus (DCN). The sacsin interactome reveals that sacsin regulates interactions between cytoskeletal and synaptic adhesion proteins. Our findings suggest that disrupted trafficking of synaptic adhesion proteins is a causal molecular deficit in ARSACS.

[5] Spinocerebellar ataxia 27B: a frequent and slowly progressive autosomal-dominant cerebellar ataxia—experience from an Italian cohort
    S Satolli, S Rossi, E Vegezzi, D Pellerin, ML Manca… (2024)
    DOI:10.1007/s00415-024-12506-x https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00415-024-12506-x
    snippet: … the occurrence in SCA27B of a mild cerebellar atrophy, mostly affecting the vermis rather … granule and Purkinje cells [31]. It is involved in spontaneous rhythmic firing of Purkinje cells by …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Autosomal-dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (ADCA) due to intronic GAA repeat expansion in FGF14 (SCA27B) is a recent, relatively common form of late-onset ataxia.<h4>Objective</h4>Here, we aimed to: (1) investigate the relative frequency of SCA27B in different clinically defined disease subgroups with late-onset ataxia collected among 16 tertiary Italian centers; (2) characterize phenotype and diagnostic findings of patients with SCA27B; (3) compare the Italian cohort with other cohorts reported in recent studies.<h4>Methods</h4>We screened 396 clinically diagnosed late-onset cerebellar ataxias of unknown cause, subdivided in sporadic cerebellar ataxia, ADCA, and multisystem atrophy cerebellar type. We identified 72 new genetically defined subjects with SCA27B. Then, we analyzed the clinical, neurophysiological, and imaging features of 64 symptomatic cases.<h4>Results</h4>In our cohort, the prevalence of SCA27B was 13.4% (53/396) with as high as 38.5% (22/57) in ADCA. The median age of onset of SCA27B patients was 62 years. All symptomatic individuals showed evidence of impaired balance and gait; cerebellar ocular motor signs were also frequent. Episodic manifestations at onset occurred in 31% of patients. Extrapyramidal features (17%) and cognitive impairment (25%) were also reported. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed cerebellar atrophy in most cases (78%). Pseudo-longitudinal assessments indicated slow progression of ataxia and minimal functional impairment.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Patients with SCA27B in Italy present as an adult-onset, slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia with predominant axial involvement and frequent cerebellar ocular motor signs. The high consistency of clinical features in SCA27B cohorts in multiple populations paves the way toward large-scale, multicenter studies.

[6] Ataxia: Dominant
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/ataxia/domatax.html
    snippet: ... Spastic ataxia syndromes. Tremor, Essential: 3q13. TUBA4A · Vanishing white ... MRI or CT: Cortical & Cerebellar atrophy; CNS pathology: Purkinje cell loss ...

[7] A dominant tubulin mutation causes cerebellar neurodegeneration in a genetic model of tubulinopathy
    S Fertuzinhos, E Legué, D Li, KF Liem Jr (2022)
    PMID:35171680 DOI:10.1126/sciadv.abf7262 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.abf7262
    snippet: … degeneration of cerebellar granule neurons and myelination defects. We show that the neural phenotypes … result from cerebellar Purkinje cell degeneration (43). To determine whether …
    abstract: Mutations in tubulins cause distinct neurodevelopmental and degenerative diseases termed "tubulinopathies"; however, little is known about the functional requirements of tubulins or how mutations cause cell-specific pathologies. Here, we identify a mutation in the gene <i>Tubb4a</i> that causes degeneration of cerebellar granule neurons and myelination defects. We show that the neural phenotypes result from a cell type-specific enrichment of a dominant mutant form of <i>Tubb4a</i> relative to the expression other β-tubulin isotypes. Loss of <i>Tubb4a</i> function does not underlie cellular pathology but is compensated by the transcriptional up-regulation of related tubulin genes in a cell type-specific manner. This work establishes that the expression of a primary tubulin mutation in mature neurons is sufficient to promote cell-autonomous cell death, consistent with a causative association of microtubule dysfunction with neurodegenerative diseases. These studies provide evidence that mutations in tubulins cause specific phenotypes based on expression ratios of tubulin isotype genes.

[8] A new genetic cause of spastic ataxia: the p.Glu415Lys variant in TUBA4A
    A Torella, I Ricca, G Piluso, D Galatolo… (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00415-023-11816-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00415-023-11816-w
    snippet: … phenotypic and genetic manifestations of TUBA4A variants and add a new type of spastic ataxia … In this paper, we present a multigenerational family with 11 affected individuals and an …
    abstract: Tubulinopathies encompass neurodevelopmental disorders caused by mutations in genes encoding for different isotypes of α- and β-tubulins, the structural components of microtubules. Less frequently, mutations in tubulins may underlie neurodegenerative disorders. In the present study, we report two families, one with 11 affected individuals and the other with a single patient, carrying a novel, likely pathogenic, variant (p. Glu415Lys) in the TUBA4A gene (NM_006000). The phenotype, not previously described, is that of spastic ataxia. Our findings widen the phenotypic and genetic manifestations of TUBA4A variants and add a new type of spastic ataxia to be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis.

[9] De novo and inherited monoallelic variants in TUBA4A cause ataxia and spasticity
    M Benkirane, M Bonhomme, H Morsy, SL Safgren… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/11/3681/7694334
    snippet: … Herein, we describe 12 patients from 11 unrelated families … neurological disorder associating cerebellar degeneration … of an inherited ataxia phenotype associated with TUBA4A rare …
    abstract: Alpha-tubulin 4A encoding gene (TUBA4A) has been associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia, based on identification of likely pathogenic variants in patients from distinct amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia cohorts. By screening a multicentric French cohort of 448 unrelated probands presenting with cerebellar ataxia, we identified ultra-rare TUBA4A missense variants, all being absent from public databases and predicted pathogenic by multiple in silico tools. In addition, gene burden analyses in the 100 000 Genomes project (100KGP) showed enrichment of TUBA4A rare variants in the inherited ataxia group compared to controls [odds ratio: 57.0847 (10.2-576.7); P = 4.02 ×10-7]. Taken together, we report 12 patients presenting with spasticity and/or cerebellar ataxia and harbouring a predicted pathogenic TUBA4A missense mutation, including five confirmed de novo cases and a mutation previously reported in a large family presenting with spastic ataxia. Cultured fibroblasts from three patients harbouring distinct TUBA4A missense showed significant alterations in microtubule organization and dynamics, providing insight of TUBA4A variants pathogenicity. Our data confirm the identification of a hereditary spastic ataxia disease gene with variable age of onset, expanding the clinical spectrum of TUBA4A associated phenotypes.

[10] De novo and inherited monoallelic variants in TUBA4A ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://mayoclinic.elsevierpure.com/en/publications/de-novo-and-inherited-monoallelic-variants-in-tuba4a-cause-ataxia
    snippet: Taken together, we report 12 patients presenting with spasticity and/or cerebellar ataxia and harbouring a predicted pathogenic TUBA4A missense ...
    abstract: Alpha-tubulin 4A encoding gene (TUBA4A) has been associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia, based on identification of likely pathogenic variants in patients from distinct amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia cohorts. By screening a multicentric French cohort of 448 unrelated probands presenting with cerebellar ataxia, we identified ultra-rare TUBA4A missense variants, all being absent from public databases and predicted pathogenic by multiple in silico tools. In addition, gene burden analyses in the 100 000 Genomes project (100KGP) showed enrichment of TUBA4A rare variants in the inherited ataxia group compared to controls [odds ratio: 57.0847 (10.2-576.7); P = 4.02 ×10-7]. Taken together, we report 12 patients presenting with spasticity and/or cerebellar ataxia and harbouring a predicted pathogenic TUBA4A missense mutation, including five confirmed de novo cases and a mutation previously reported in a large family presenting with spastic ataxia. Cultured fibroblasts from three patients harbouring distinct TUBA4A missense showed significant alterations in microtubule organization and dynamics, providing insight of TUBA4A variants pathogenicity. Our data confirm the identification of a hereditary spastic ataxia disease gene with variable age of onset, expanding the clinical spectrum of TUBA4A associated phenotypes.