SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … ranging from severe neurodevelopmental disorders to adult-onset CharcotMarie-Tooth disease. Functional studies show that DHX9 variants disrupt DHX9 cellular localization and …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[2] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 variants is also beginning to emerge [27,28]. Clinical data for individuals carrying variants in DDX6 [25], EIF4A2 [24], or …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[3] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … in the winged helix and the C-terminal RGG domains of DHX9 which associate with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (also known as Charcot–Marie Tooth type 2 disease). …

[4] O18: Deciphering DHX9 gene pathogenicity in neurological disorders with distinct phenotypes
    T Guo, C Wang, L Gong, D Calame, J Lupski… (2026)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2949774426008150
    snippet: … Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) encompass a spectrum of conditions affecting brain … type 2 Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) - a distal symmetric peripheral polyneuropathy. DHX9, an …

[5] GREGoR: accelerating genomics for rare diseases
    M Dawood, B Heavner, MM Wheeler, RA Ungar… (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09613-8
    snippet: … RNU4-2 has now served as a seed for more RNU4minor spliceosome genes being implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders84,85. Another example from GREGoR is CHASERR, a …
    abstract: Rare diseases are collectively common, affecting approximately 1 in 20 individuals worldwide. In recent years, rapid progress has been made in rare disease diagnostics due to advances in next-generation sequencing, development of new computational and functional genomics approaches to prioritize genes and variants and increased global sharing of clinical and genetic data. However, more than half of individuals suspected to have a rare disease lack a genetic diagnosis. The Genomics Research to Elucidate the Genetics of Rare Diseases (GREGoR) Consortium was initiated to study thousands of challenging rare disease cases and families and apply, standardize and evaluate emerging genomics technologies and analytics to accelerate their adoption in clinical practice. Furthermore, all data generated, currently representing over 7,500 individuals from over 3,000 families, are rapidly made available to researchers worldwide through the Analysis, Visualization and Informatics Lab-space (AnVIL) to catalyse global efforts to develop approaches for genetic diagnoses in rare diseases. Most of these families have undergone previous clinical genetic testing but remained unsolved, with most being exome-negative. Here we describe the collaborative research framework, datasets and discoveries comprising GREGoR that will provide foundational resources and substrates for the future of rare disease genomics.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ... - PubMed
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37467750/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — ... neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37467750 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.013 https://research.cuhk.edu.hk/en/publications/dhx9-the-gene-encoding-the-dexh-box-helicase-dhx9-underlies-neuro-2/
    snippet: DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopmental disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Daniel G. Calame; , Tianu Guo ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[8] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Monoallelic-variation-in-DHX9%2C-the-gene-encoding-Calame-Guo/c05ad10fe0536324bf7671a31b5ce11a4e6156e0
    snippet: ... neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease ... Daniel G. CalameS.
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[9] Axonal motor polyneuropathy in a 13 years old Girl with a de Novo variant in ADNP
    S Scaccini, CA Cesaroni, SG Caraffi, S Rizzi, S Rosato… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w
    snippet: … ] showing a broad phenotypic spectrum that includes intellectual disability/… peripheral nervous system, can help us expand the phenotype of patients with neurodevelopmental disorders …
    abstract: ADNP-Related Disorder [previously known as Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome (HVDAS)] is a rare genetic condition resulting from mutations in the activity-dependent neuroprotector homeobox (ADNP) gene. The ADNP protein has multiple functions, including serving as an essential transcription factor for brain development. In addition, pathogenic variants in ADNP have been recognized as one of the most frequent monogenic causes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability. Clinical features include craniofacial dysmorphisms, congenital heart defects, gastrointestinal problems such as feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux and frequent vomiting, vision problems, recurrent infections and seizures. Here we describe the novel case of a girl who came to our attention in infancy because of poor and stereotyped motor repertoire, repetitive purposeless movements, and intellectual disability. Whole exome sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous variant in the ADNP gene, leading to the diagnosis of HVDAS at age 5 years. At the age of 12, nerve conduction velocity testing showed severe four-limb axonal motor polyneuropathy. In this article, we would like to focus on the presence of peripheral nervous system involvement associated with the pathogenic ADNP de novo variant, which may contribute to the clinical characterization of ADNP-Related Disorder.

[10] … in the choline and ethanolamine transporter FLVCR1 underlies a pleiotropic disease spectrum from adult neurodegeneration to severe developmental disorders
    DG Calame, JH Wong, P Panda, DT Nguyen… (2024)
    PMC10888986 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10888986/
    snippet: … To comprehensively characterize the phenotypic spectrum of FLVCR1-related disorders 197 … Families 13-20 had mild FLVCR1-related diseases including typical phenotypes 255 …