SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … , neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and … FILIP1 as a novel gene for neurological and neuromuscular … Hypotonia, delayed achievement of motor milestones, …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[2] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … in the absence of muscle weakness or features … of congenital myopathy and intellectual disability. Additional clinical features included flexion contractures, scoliosis, facial hypotonia and …

[3] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … , leading to progressive muscle weakness and atrophy. SMA … a severe congenital myopathy with fetal akinesia, hypotonia, … More recently, FILIP1 loss-of-function variants were identified …

[4] 246th ENMC international workshop: protein aggregate myopathies 24–26 May 2019, Hoofddorp, The Netherlands
    M Olivé, L Winter, DO Fürst, R Schröder… (2021)
    PMID:33303357 DOI:10.1016/j.nmd.2020.11.003 https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(20)30666-0/abstract
    snippet: … Nemaline myopathy (NM) is the most common form of congenital myopathy that results in hypotonia and muscle weakness. This disease is clinically and genetically highly …

[5] The 2026 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2026)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(25)01030-2/abstract
    snippet: … In each group every entry corresponds to a clinical-genetic entity and has an item number. A … Muscle weakness with hyperlaxity, orofacial abnormalities and respiratory infections 5.45 …

[6] FILIP1 - Filamin-A-interacting protein 1
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41963434 DOI:10.1038/s41598-026-47515-5 https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q7Z7B0/entry
    snippet: An autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder characterized by multiple congenital joint contractures, hypotonia, muscle weakness, and facial dysmorphism.
    abstract: This study investigated the association between temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis and specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms. We also explored the potential functional impacts of these polymorphisms using in silico methods. 354 patients with temporomandibular disorders were classified into osteoarthritis and without osteoarthritis according to the presence of degenerative bone changes in the magnetic resonance imaging including osteophytes, erosion, subchondral cysts, and atrophy. Genomic DNA was extracted and genotyping was performed to determine 16 alleles. Multivariate analysis was performed to explore the polymorphisms associated with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis, followed by in silico analysis to predict the functional relevance of the polymorphisms. Multivariate analysis identified that rs9350591 (between FILIP1 and SENP6) and rs8044769 (FTO) are potentially associated with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis. In silico analyses revealed that rs9350591 affects transcription factor binding, whereas rs8044769 alters the predicted score as a splicing site. These findings suggest that genetic factors, particularly rs9350591 and rs8044769, are associated with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis among patients with temporomandibular disorders. This underscores the importance of genetic studies for understanding temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis. This study provides the potential genetic clues for temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis and insights into the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying this disease.

[7] FILIP1 gene Filamin A Interacting Protein 1
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/FILIP1
    snippet: Diseases associated with FILIP1 include Neuromuscular Disorder, Congenital ... congenital joint contractures, hypotonia, muscle weakness, and facial dysmorphism.

[8] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … A study detailing the genetic and clinical findings in these … FILIP1-related congenital neuromuscular disorder with … in hypotonia and secondary joint contractures, and dysmorphic …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[9] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … dysmorphism included facial hypotonia, triangular facies, low … that the most common clinical findings are elbow contracture, … In summary, we provide clinical and genetic evidence that bi-…
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[10] Neuromuscular Disorder, Congenital, with Dysmorphic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/neuromuscular_disorder_congenital_with_dysmorphic_facies
    snippet: An autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder characterized by multiple congenital joint contractures, hypotonia, muscle weakness, and facial dysmorphism.