SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A mutation update on the LDS‐associated genes TGFB2/3 and SMAD2/3
    D Schepers, G Tortora, H Morisaki… (2018)
    DOI:10.1002/humu.23407 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/humu.23407
    snippet: … The Loeys–Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a connective tissue … tortuosity, hypertelorism, and bifid/broad uvula or cleft palate. … of the TGF-𝛽 pathway, SMAD2 and SMAD3, were shown to be …
    abstract: The Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a connective tissue disorder affecting the cardiovascular, skeletal, and ocular system. Most typically, LDS patients present with aortic aneurysms and arterial tortuosity, hypertelorism, and bifid/broad uvula or cleft palate. Initially, mutations in transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) receptors (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) were described to cause LDS, hereby leading to impaired TGF-β signaling. More recently, TGF-β ligands, TGFB2 and TGFB3, as well as intracellular downstream effectors of the TGF-β pathway, SMAD2 and SMAD3, were shown to be involved in LDS. This emphasizes the role of disturbed TGF-β signaling in LDS pathogenesis. Since most literature so far has focused on TGFBR1/2, we provide a comprehensive review on the known and some novel TGFB2/3 and SMAD2/3 mutations. For TGFB2 and SMAD3, the clinical manifestations, both of the patients previously described in the literature and our newly reported patients, are summarized in detail. This clearly indicates that LDS concerns a disorder with a broad phenotypical spectrum that is still emerging as more patients will be identified. All mutations described here are present in the corresponding Leiden Open Variant Database.

[2] Loeys-dietz syndrome
    JD Velchev, L Van Laer, I Luyckx, H Dietz… (2021)
    DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_11 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_11
    snippet: … The most typical clinical triad includes hypertelorism, bifid uvula or cleft palate and aortic … function were suggested as mutational mechanisms for both SMAD2/3 and TGFB2/3 mutations. …
    abstract: Loeys-Dietz syndrome is an autosomal dominant aortic aneurysm syndrome characterized by multisystemic involvement. The most typical clinical triad includes hypertelorism, bifid uvula or cleft palate and aortic aneurysm with tortuosity. Natural history is significant for aortic dissection at smaller aortic diameter and arterial aneurysms throughout the arterial tree. The genetic cause is heterogeneous and includes mutations in genes encoding for components of the transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) signalling pathway: TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD2, SMAD3, TGFB2 and TGFB3. Despite the loss of function nature of these mutations, the patient-derived aortic tissues show evidence of increased (rather than decreased) TGFβ signalling. These insights offer new options for therapeutic interventions.

[3] Transforming growth factor β signaling perturbation in the Loeys-Dietz syndrome
    A Pezzini, E Del Zotto, A Giossi… (2012)
    https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/ben/cmc/2012/00000019/00000003/art00010
    snippet: … Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertelorism, bifid uvula, and/or cleft palate… of the Smad2 MH2 domain is required for Smad2 docking …
    abstract: The transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) superfamily consists of multipotential secreting cytokines that mediate many key events in normal cellular growth and development, including differentiation, proliferation, motility, organization and death. TGFβs act as ligand for 3 classes of cell surface receptors, the transmembrane serine-threonine kinase receptors, TGFβ receptor type I (TGFβRI) and type 2 (TGFβRII), and TGFβRIII receptors which include an ubiquitous extracellular β-glycan and the membrane glycoprotein endoglin (CD105). Binding of TGFβs to their receptors initiates diverse cellular responses resulting in the phosphorilation of Smad proteins, which then translocate to the nucleus and regulate the transcription of target genes. Perturbation of TGFβ signaling has been implicated in various human disorders including cancer, fibrosis and auto-immune diseases. Recently, mutations in TGFβR1 and TGFβR2 genes have been found in association with a continuum of clinical features with widespread vascular involvement. The extreme of clinical severity is represented by the Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertelorism, bifid uvula, and/or cleft palate, and aggressive arteriopathy causing arterial tortuosity as well as life-threatening complications such as vascular aneurysms and dissections. Elastin disarray, loss of elastic fibre architecture and increased collagen expression in the arterial wall are the pathologic hallmark of LDS. In the present review article we will provide details on the activation of TGFβ cascade, on the clinical features of LDS, as well as on the mechanisms of TGFβ signaling perturbation leading to this condition and the potential role of the antagonism of TGFβ activity in disease management.

[4] Loeys–dietz syndrome
    A Verstraeten, HC Dietz… (2021)
    DOI:10.1002/9781119432692.ch36 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781119432692.ch36
    snippet: … hypertelorism, craniosynostosis, bifid uvula, cleft palate, … SMAD2, too few mutation‐positive cases have yet been reported to deter‑ mine at which end of the phenotypic spectrum SMAD2…

[5] Duplication of the TGFBR1 gene causes features of Loeys-Dietz syndrome
    J Breckpot, W Budts, F De Zegher… (2010)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721210000856
    snippet: … characterized by hypertelorism, bifid uvula or cleft palate, … by increased activation of Smad2, a transcriptional factor … in the pathogenesis of the Loeys-Dietz phenotype. Further functional …
    abstract: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS; OMIM:609192) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertelorism, bifid uvula or cleft palate, and arterial tortuosity with widespread vascular aneurysms and a high risk of aortic dissection at an early age. LDS results from mutations in the transforming growth factor beta-receptor I and II (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) genes, altering the transmission of the subcellular TGF-β signal, mediated by increased activation of Smad2. We report on a 17-year-old boy with pubertas tarda, a bifid uvula, camptodactyly and facial dysmorphic features, suggestive of LDS. Mutation analysis of TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 was normal. By means of molecular karyotyping two previously unreported chromosomal imbalances were detected: a 120 kb deletion on chromosome 22q13.31q13.32, inherited from an unaffected parent, and a de novo 14.6 Mb duplication on chromosome 9q22.32q31.3, comprising TGFBR1. We hypothesize that copy number gain of TGFBR1 contributes to the phenotype.

[6] WHAT IS LDS? | MAIN CHARACTERISTICS | DIAGNOSIS
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.loeysdietz.org/en/medical-information
    snippet: ... (hypertelorism), and a broad or split (bifid) uvula. These findings can ... Loeys-Dietz syndrome 6 caused by mutations in the SMAD2 gene. Although there ...

[7] A mutation update on the LDS‐associated genes TGFB2/3 ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC5947146 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5947146/
    snippet: by D Schepers · 2018 · Cited by 206 — ... hypertelorism, and bifid/broad uvula or cleft palate. Initially, mutations ... Keywords: aneurysm, Loeys–Dietz syndrome, SMAD2, SMAD3, TGFB2, TGFB3. 1 ...
    abstract: The Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a connective tissue disorder affecting the cardiovascular, skeletal, and ocular system. Most typically, LDS patients present with aortic aneurysms and arterial tortuosity, hypertelorism, and bifid/broad uvula or cleft palate. Initially, mutations in transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) receptors (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) were described to cause LDS, hereby leading to impaired TGF-β signaling. More recently, TGF-β ligands, TGFB2 and TGFB3, as well as intracellular downstream effectors of the TGF-β pathway, SMAD2 and SMAD3, were shown to be involved in LDS. This emphasizes the role of disturbed TGF-β signaling in LDS pathogenesis. Since most literature so far has focused on TGFBR1/2, we provide a comprehensive review on the known and some novel TGFB2/3 and SMAD2/3 mutations. For TGFB2 and SMAD3, the clinical manifestations, both of the patients previously described in the literature and our newly reported patients, are summarized in detail. This clearly indicates that LDS concerns a disorder with a broad phenotypical spectrum that is still emerging as more patients will be identified. All mutations described here are present in the corresponding Leiden Open Variant Database.

[8] A mutation update on the LDS-associated genes TGFB2/3 and ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:29392890 DOI:10.1002/humu.23407 https://pure.johnshopkins.edu/en/publications/a-mutation-update-on-the-lds-associated-genes-tgfb23-and-smad23/
    snippet: ... hypertelorism, and bifid/broad uvula or cleft palate. ... Loeys–Dietz syndrome; SMAD2; SMAD3; TGFB2; TGFB3; aneurysm ... cleft palate. Initially, mutations in ...
    abstract: The Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a connective tissue disorder affecting the cardiovascular, skeletal, and ocular system. Most typically, LDS patients present with aortic aneurysms and arterial tortuosity, hypertelorism, and bifid/broad uvula or cleft palate. Initially, mutations in transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) receptors (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) were described to cause LDS, hereby leading to impaired TGF-β signaling. More recently, TGF-β ligands, TGFB2 and TGFB3, as well as intracellular downstream effectors of the TGF-β pathway, SMAD2 and SMAD3, were shown to be involved in LDS. This emphasizes the role of disturbed TGF-β signaling in LDS pathogenesis. Since most literature so far has focused on TGFBR1/2, we provide a comprehensive review on the known and some novel TGFB2/3 and SMAD2/3 mutations. For TGFB2 and SMAD3, the clinical manifestations, both of the patients previously described in the literature and our newly reported patients, are summarized in detail. This clearly indicates that LDS concerns a disorder with a broad phenotypical spectrum that is still emerging as more patients will be identified. All mutations described here are present in the corresponding Leiden Open Variant Database.

[9] Loeys-Dietz Syndrome 6 (LDS6)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/loeys_dietz_syndrome_6
    snippet: ... hypertelorism, and bifid uvula or cleft palate. It is associated with ... Loeys-Dietz syndrome 6 · SMAD2. Based on data from GTR. Anatomical Context for ...

[10] What does Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Look Like?
    (authors not shown)
    https://loeysdietzcanada.org/what-does-loeys-dietz-syndrome-look-like-an-overview-into-the-phenotypic-differences-across-lds-subtypes/
    snippet: LDS6 (Mutations in SMAD2). o Characterized by the presence of craniofacial features (cleft palate, hypertelorism, bifid uvula). o Most severe form of LDS. o ...