SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its associated DNA methylation signature
    RH Van Jaarsveld, J Reilly, MC Cornips… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S109836002200942X
    snippet: … an episignature that is able to discriminate KDM2B variants from controls and classified these 13 variants as pathogenic (Table 1). Interestingly, the KDM2B associated episignature …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD.<h4>Methods</h4>Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature.<h4>Results</h4>We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.

[2] Novel diagnostic DNA methylation episignatures expand and refine the epigenetic landscapes of Mendelian disorders
    MA Levy, H McConkey, J Kerkhof… (2022)
    https://www.cell.com/hgg-advances/fulltext/S2666-2477(21)00056-7
    snippet: … In this study, we describe 19 novel episignature disorders and … not having a neurodevelopmental phenotype. Each unaffected … KDM2B episignature, which could potentially be a result of …
    abstract: Overlapping clinical phenotypes and an expanding breadth and complexity of genomic associations are a growing challenge in the diagnosis and clinical management of Mendelian disorders. The functional consequences and clinical impacts of genomic variation may involve unique, disorder-specific, genomic DNA methylation episignatures. In this study, we describe 19 novel episignature disorders and compare the findings alongside 38 previously established episignatures for a total of 57 episignatures associated with 65 genetic syndromes. We demonstrate increasing resolution and specificity ranging from protein complex, gene, sub-gene, protein domain, and even single nucleotide-level Mendelian episignatures. We show the power of multiclass modeling to develop highly accurate and disease-specific diagnostic classifiers. This study significantly expands the number and spectrum of disorders with detectable DNA methylation episignatures, improves the clinical diagnostic capabilities through the resolution of unsolved cases and the reclassification of variants of unknown clinical significance, and provides further insight into the molecular etiology of Mendelian conditions.

[3] Episignature analysis of moderate effects and mosaics
    K Oexle, M Zech, LG Stühn, S Siegert… (2023)
    PMID:37365401 DOI:10.1038/s41431-023-01406-9 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-023-01406-9
    snippet: … the association between DNA methylation aberration and age at … between phenotypes and methylation deviation may be detect… Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental …
    abstract: DNA methylation classifiers ("episignatures") help to determine the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance (VUS). However, their sensitivity is limited due to their training on unambiguous cases with strong-effect variants so that the classification of variants with reduced effect size or in mosaic state may fail. Moreover, episignature evaluation of mosaics as a function of their degree of mosaicism has not been developed so far. We improved episignatures with respect to three categories. Applying (i) minimum-redundancy-maximum-relevance feature selection we reduced their length by up to one order of magnitude without loss of accuracy. Performing (ii) repeated re-training of a support vector machine classifier by step-wise inclusion of cases in the training set that reached probability scores larger than 0.5, we increased the sensitivity of the episignature-classifiers by 30%. In the newly diagnosed patients we confirmed the association between DNA methylation aberration and age at onset of KMT2B-deficient dystonia. Moreover, we found evidence for allelic series, including KMT2B-variants with moderate effects and comparatively mild phenotypes such as late-onset focal dystonia. Retrained classifiers also can detect mosaics that previously remained below the 0.5-threshold, as we showed for KMT2D-associated Kabuki syndrome. Conversely, episignature-classifiers are able to revoke erroneous exome calls of mosaicism, as we demonstrated by (iii) comparing presumed mosaic cases with a distribution of artificial in silico-mosaics that represented all the possible variation in degree of mosaicism, variant read sampling and methylation analysis.

[4] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … undergo DNA methylation testing, EpiSign analysis of Case 1 detected the KDM2B-associated episignature … Evaluation of DNA methylation episignatures for diagnosis and phenotype …
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[5] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series Supporting the CxxC Domain Phenotype With Emphasis on Ocular and Dermatologic Features
    A Gomes, Á Martín‐Rodríguez… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: … heterozygous variants in KDM2B and a specific methylation pattern (“episignature”) associated … DNA methylation episignature testing provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B…
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[6] Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC9825659 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9825659/
    snippet: by RH van Jaarsveld · 2022 · Cited by 40 — In conclusion, we have established an episignature that is able to discriminate KDM2B variants from controls and classified these 13 variants as pathogenic ( ...
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD.<h4>Methods</h4>Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature.<h4>Results</h4>We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.

[7] Delineation of a KDM2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/am/pii/S109836002200942X
    snippet: by RH van Jaarsveld · 2023 · Cited by 38 — Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC) implying that KDM2B protects against de novo DNA methylation during mouse development12. ... KDM2B episignature cohort. alt= ...

[8] Entry - *609078 - LYSINE DEMETHYLASE 2B; KDM2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/609078
    snippet: Analysis of leukocyte-derived DNA from 4 patients showed the KDM2B-associated episignature. Overexpression of 9 of the variants in HEK293 cells resulted in ...

[9] KDM2B Variants in the CxxC Domain Impair Its DNA-Binding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://digitalcommons.library.tmc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6468&context=uthgsbs_docs
    snippet: by ASE van Oirsouw · 2025 · Cited by 3 — Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding ...
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[10] Identification of DNA Methylation Episignatures for Classification and Phenotype/Genotype Correlation in Mendelian Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    J Reilly (2022)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/4d490a4ccf210a521542a90c7adc68e6/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … KDM2B variant carriers. Figure 3-S2: A shared episignature amongst the majority of KDM2B … to have a methylation profile matching the episignature for Kabuki syndrome (MIM# 147920)…