SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A review on the role of genetic mutations in the autism spectrum disorder
    S Ghafouri (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s12035-023-03405-9 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12035-023-03405-9
    snippet: … While Rett syndrome is a rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder being characterized by … Another study reported the presence of biallelic PAX5 mutations in a patient with ASD and …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is among the most widespread neurodevelopmental diseases, with an approximate prevalence rate of 1 in 59. From a genetic point of view, this disorder is highly heterogeneous. This disorder is associated with both inheritable and de novo mutations in several genes. In addition to genetic loci that are identified through early karyotype analyses, recent advent of high throughput sequencing methods has facilitated identification of several genetic loci that confer risk of ASD. The current review provides an overview of different types of identified mutations including missense and nonsense mutations and copy number variations in various genes in individuals affected with ASD.

[2] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … Heterozygous ASTN2 deletions have been identified in autism, schizophrenia, and intellectual disability cohorts and are thought to contribute to neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.

[3] Marfan Syndrome Associated With Intellectual Disability and Behavioral Anomalies: Further Evidence for the Effect of Compound Heterozygous Variants in FBN1 on …
    A Khan, N Kakar, A Kakar… (2026)
    PMID:41486098 DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70038 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70038
    snippet: … To assess the impact of monoallelic and biallelic variants on the MFS phenotype, the … Biallelic variants generally lead to more severe MFS symptoms, whereas monoallelic variants are …
    abstract: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a rare connective tissue disorder characterized by involvement of the cardiovascular, ocular, and musculoskeletal systems. Pathogenic variants in FBN1 cause most of the MFS cases; however, intellectual disability (ID) is rarely observed. A non-consanguineous Pakistani family with four affected individuals was recruited. Physical examinations, echocardiography, and doppler ultrasound were performed as part of the clinical assessment. Exome sequencing was conducted on the index patient, and Sanger sequencing was performed for the entire family. ID was the primary symptom in all the affected individuals. A detailed examination showed that all affected individuals and their affected mother were tall, had long limbs, craniofacial abnormalities, and exhibited low IQ, aggressive, and hyperactive behaviors. Heart defects, such as atrial septal defects and pulmonary hypertension, were observed in one affected individual and her mother. Genetic analysis identified two rare missense variants in FBN1, c.1552G>A (p.Gly518Arg) and c.3046A>G (p.Thr1016Ala), both predicted to be deleterious. The p.Gly518Arg variant is predicted to be likely pathogenic, while the p.Thr1016Ala variant is of uncertain significance. Notably, these variants were found in two affected individuals in a compound heterozygous state, correlating with more severe symptoms. Each variant alone, seen in the two patients, is associated with milder symptoms, indicating incomplete penetrance. In conclusion, this study identified rare heterozygous missense variants in FBN1, suggesting a potential connection between neurodevelopmental outcomes and variants in FBN1. However, further research is needed to clarify the role of FBN1 in ID.

[4] From diagnosis to relapse, mutational landscape and clonal evolution of juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia
    C Arfeuille (2023)
    https://theses.hal.science/tel-04876501/
    snippet: … biallelic alterations are found on negative regulators of the pathway such as CBL (occasionally monoallelic … We show that biallelic germline loss of function mutations of SH2B3 leads to …

[5] mono-allelic-variants Research Articles - Page 6
    (authors not shown)
    https://discovery.researcher.life/topic/mono-allelic-variants/1721713?page=6
    snippet: Further evidence of biallelic NAV3 ... Monoallelic de novo variants in DDX17 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder. ... Biallelic and monoallelic variants in EFEMP1 ...

[6] NAV3
    (authors not shown)
    https://nhsgms-panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/entities/NAV3
    snippet: NAV3. neuron navigator 3. OMIM: 611629 · See ... BOTH monoallelic and biallelic, autosomal or pseudoautosomal. Phenotypes. recessive neurodevelopmental disorder.

[7] Further evidence of biallelic NAV3 variants associated with recessive neurodevelopmental disorder with dysmorphism, developmental delay, intellectual disability …
    N Kakar, S Mascarenhas, A Ali, Azmatullah… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-024-02718-6 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-024-02718-6
    snippet: … allelic and three mono-allelic variants in NAV3 were reported … They had normal height, absent speech, no cleft lip or cleft … with biallelic variants in NAV3 with variable dysmorphic features…
    abstract: Neuron navigators (NAVs) are cytoskeleton-associated proteins well known for their role in axonal guidance, neuronal migration, and neurite growth necessary for neurodevelopment. Neuron navigator 3 (NAV3) is one of the three NAV proteins highly expressed in the embryonic and adult brain. However, the role of the NAV3 gene in human disease is not well-studied. Recently, five bi-allelic and three mono-allelic variants in NAV3 were reported in 12 individuals from eight unrelated families with neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD). Here, we report five patients from three unrelated consanguineous families segregating autosomal recessive NDD. Patients have symptoms of dysmorphism, intellectual disability, developmental delay, and behavioral abnormalities. Exome sequencing (ES) was performed on two affected individuals from one large family, and one affected individual from each of the other two families. ES revealed two homozygous nonsense c.6325C > T; p.(Gln2109Ter) and c.6577C > T; p.(Arg2193Ter) and a homozygous splice site (c.243 + 1G > T) variants in the NAV3 (NM_001024383.2). Analysis of single-cell sequencing datasets from embryonic and young adult human brains revealed that NAV3 is highly expressed in the excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, and microglia, consistent with its role in neurodevelopment. In conclusion, in this study, we further validate biallelic protein truncating variants in NAV3 as a cause of NDD, expanding the spectrum of pathogenic variants in this newly discovered NDD gene.

[8] Variants of NAV3, a neuronal morphogenesis protein, cause intellectual disability, developmental delay, and microcephaly
    A Ghaffar, T Akhter, P Strømme, D Misceo… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-024-06466-1
    snippet: … the role of NAV3 in neurodevelopmental disorders, and … (ID), microcephaly, speech delay, aggressive behavior, and … studies, biallelic and monoallelic variants ofNAV3are responsible …
    abstract: Microtubule associated proteins (MAPs) are widely expressed in the central nervous system, and have established roles in cell proliferation, myelination, neurite formation, axon specification, outgrowth, dendrite, and synapse formation. We report eleven individuals from seven families harboring predicted pathogenic biallelic, de novo, and heterozygous variants in the NAV3 gene, which encodes the microtubule positive tip protein neuron navigator 3 (NAV3). All affected individuals have intellectual disability (ID), microcephaly, skeletal deformities, ocular anomalies, and behavioral issues. In mouse brain, Nav3 is expressed throughout the nervous system, with more prominent signatures in postmitotic, excitatory, inhibiting, and sensory neurons. When overexpressed in HEK293T and COS7 cells, pathogenic variants impaired NAV3 ability to stabilize microtubules. Further, knocking-down nav3 in zebrafish led to severe morphological defects, microcephaly, impaired neuronal growth, and behavioral impairment, which were rescued with co-injection of WT NAV3 mRNA and not by transcripts encoding the pathogenic variants. Our findings establish the role of NAV3 in neurodevelopmental disorders, and reveal its involvement in neuronal morphogenesis, and neuromuscular responses.

[9] NAV3 Missense Variant in a Homozygous State: Strengthening Links to Neurodevelopmental Disorder
    M Umair, A Ullah, Najumuddin, G Zaman… (2025)
    DOI:10.2174/0109298673367919250626005640 https://www.benthamdirect.com/content/journals/cmc/10.2174/0109298673367919250626005640
    snippet: … biallelic missense variant in NAV3 adds a new layer to our understanding of its potential contribution to autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorders… is ambiguous speech linked …
    abstract: <h4>Introduction</h4>Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) represent a diverse and heterogeneous group of conditions, including neurodevelopmental delay (NDD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and neurodevelopmental encephalopathy with epilepsy (NDEE). While these disorders often share phenotypic similarities, their underlying genetic causes can vary widely, making clinical diagnosis challenging.<h4>Methods</h4>In this study, we performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on a family having an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder. The proband (II-2) underwent WGS, followed by variant filtering through an in-house bioinformatics pipeline. Sanger sequencing and 3D protein modeling were performed to confirm the pathogenicity of the identified variants.<h4>Results</h4>A novel biallelic missense variant in the NAV3 (c.3430T>C; p.Ser1144Pro) was detected using WGS and Sanger sequencing. Subsequently, 3D protein modeling revealed significant alterations in the secondary structure of NAV3, indicating a potential pathogenic effect.<h4>Discussion</h4>The identification of a novel biallelic missense variant in NAV3 adds a new layer to our understanding of its potential contribution to autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorders. This case expands the mutational landscape of NAV3 and underscores its emerging significance in neurodevelopment.<h4>Conclusion</h4>This study reports a novel NAV3 variant in association with autosomal recessive NDD, and contributes to the growing evidence that NAV3 plays a crucial role in human neurodevelopment. Functional validation and identification of additional patients will be essential to establish definitive genotype-phenotype correlations and uncover the mechanistic pathways underlying NAV3-associated disorders.

[10] Biallelic Truncating Variants in SCN3B Encoding Nav Channel Subunit β3 Lead to Neurodevelopmental Phenotype with and without Epilepsy and Ataxia
    N Routledge, M Lammens, R Maroofian… (2025)
    DOI:10.1002/ana.78014 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ana.78014
    snippet: … with cardiac disorders, a link with neurodevelopmental disorders (… Monoallelic variants in β-subunit genes have been … She lacked comprehensible speech, walked at 24 months with a …
    abstract: SCN3B encodes the β3 auxiliary subunit, essential for voltage-gated Na<sup>+</sup> (Nav) channel trafficking and gating. Although SCN3B has been associated with cardiac disorders, a link with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) has not been established. Using a genotype-first approach, we identified homozygous truncating variants (c.281G>A-β3<sup>W94*</sup>, c.584 + 1G>A-β3<sup>S196*</sup>) in 2 consanguineous Pakistani families, leading to global developmental delay, intellectual disability and autism, with severe cognitive impairment, ataxia, and seizures in the case of β3<sup>W94*</sup>. Electrophysiological analysis revealed subtype-specific gating alterations on multiple brain Nav channel subtypes. This is the first report linking SCN3B mutations to NDD, expanding our understanding of Nav channelopathies. ANN NEUROL 2025;98:864-870.