SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Understanding the new BRD4‐related syndrome: Clinical and genomic delineation with an international cohort study
    G Jouret, S Heide, A Sorlin, L Faivre… (2022)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.14141 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.14141
    snippet: … , the most classic being Cornelia de Lange syndrome. However, no cohort … examinations, phenotypes of pediatric patients and adults. … This work extends the phenotypic spectrum of …
    abstract: BRD4 is part of a multiprotein complex involved in loading the cohesin complex onto DNA, a fundamental process required for cohesin-mediated loop extrusion and formation of Topologically Associating Domains. Pathogenic variations in this complex have been associated with a growing number of syndromes, collectively known as cohesinopathies, the most classic being Cornelia de Lange syndrome. However, no cohort study has been conducted to delineate the clinical and molecular spectrum of BRD4-related disorder. We formed an international collaborative study, and collected 14 new patients, including two fetuses. We performed phenotype and genotype analysis, integrated prenatal findings from fetopathological examinations, phenotypes of pediatric patients and adults. We report the first cohort of patients with BRD4-related disorder and delineate the dysmorphic features at different ages. This work extends the phenotypic spectrum of cohesinopathies and characterize a new clinically relevant and recognizable pattern, distinguishable from the other cohesinopathies.

[2] Non-Classic Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Due to BRD4 Gene Alterations: A Literature Review
    F Lonardo, M Falco, C Costabile, P Fontana (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9067/12/11/1440
    snippet: … the pluripotency network in mouse embryonic stem cells. Instead, … CdLS phenotype, suggesting that BRD4 haploinsufficiency is … and the identification of new adult cases will enable us to …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare congenital disorder characterised by distinctive facial features, growth retardation, limb abnormalities and developmental delays. It is characterised by genetic heterogeneity and also presents a broad clinical variability, with a spectrum of manifestations ranging from mild to severe, with milder phenotypes that can be difficult to ascertain based on physical characteristics. Pathogenic variations in the <i>NIPBL</i> gene account for the majority of cases, but variations in several other genes, including <i>BRD4</i>, have been identified as causative factors for non-classic or milder forms of the syndrome. This review aims to analyse the roles that <i>BRD4</i> plays in the various pathways in which it is involved and to summarise current knowledge on atypical CdLS associated with <i>BRD4</i> gene alterations, highlighting clinical features, molecular mechanisms, and implications for diagnostic assessment and patient care.

[3] BRD4 interacts with NIPBL and BRD4 is mutated in a Cornelia de Lange–like syndrome
    G Olley, M Ansari, H Bengani, GR Grimes, J Rhodes… (2018)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-018-0042-y
    snippet: … the clinical phenotype associated with BRD4 haploinsufficiency overlapped with that of Cornelia de Lange … We derived mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from F0 Brd4Y430C/Y430C, …
    abstract: An amendment to this paper has been published and can be accessed via a link at the top of the paper.

[4] Advancing the clinical and molecular understanding of cornelia de lange syndrome: A multidisciplinary pediatric case series and review of the literature
    K Gruca (2024)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: … Diagnosing CdLS in adults with milder involvement can be … phenotype suggest a high likelihood of Cornelia de Lange … in chromatin regulation such as BRD4 and AFF4 (CHOPS …

[5] The Cornelia de Lange Syndrome-associated factor NIPBL interacts with BRD4 ET domain for transcription control of a common set of genes
    N Luna (2019)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41419-019-1792-x
    snippet: … CdLS-like phenotype associated with BRD4 mutations. … in the adult. The observation that some BET members remain … mice were found to be embryonic lethal21–23. In addition, while …
    abstract: Mutations in NIPBL are the major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS). NIPBL is the cohesin-loading factor and has recently been associated with the BET (bromodomains and extra-terminal (ET) domain) proteins BRD2 and BRD4. Related to this, a CdLS-like phenotype has been described associated to BRD4 mutations. Here, we show direct interaction of NIPBL with different BET members in yeast, and selective interaction with BRD4 in cells, being the ET domain involved in the interaction. To understand the relationship between NIPBL and BET proteins, we have performed RNA-Seq expression analysis following depletion of the different proteins. Results indicate that genes regulated by NIPBL largely overlap with those regulated by BRD4 but not with those regulated by BRD2. ChIP-Seq analysis indicates preferential NIPBL occupancy at promoters, and knockdown experiments show mutual stabilization of NIPBL and BRD4 on co-regulated promoters. Moreover, human fibroblasts from CdLS probands with mutations in NIPBL show reduced BRD4 at co-occupied promoters. Functional analysis in vivo, using mutants of Drosophila melanogaster, confirmed the genetic interaction between Nipped-B and fs(1)h, the orthologs of human NIPBL and BRD4, respectively. Thus, we provide evidence for NIPBL and BRD4 cooperation in transcriptional regulation, which should contribute to explain the recently observed CdLS-like phenotype associated with BRD4 mutations.

[6] Non-Classic Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Due to BRD4 ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12650802 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12650802/
    snippet: by F Lonardo · 2025 · Cited by 2 — These authors identified a missense sequence variation in BRD4 associated with a Cornelia de Lange-like syndrome that reduces BRD4 binding to ...
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare congenital disorder characterised by distinctive facial features, growth retardation, limb abnormalities and developmental delays. It is characterised by genetic heterogeneity and also presents a broad clinical variability, with a spectrum of manifestations ranging from mild to severe, with milder phenotypes that can be difficult to ascertain based on physical characteristics. Pathogenic variations in the <i>NIPBL</i> gene account for the majority of cases, but variations in several other genes, including <i>BRD4</i>, have been identified as causative factors for non-classic or milder forms of the syndrome. This review aims to analyse the roles that <i>BRD4</i> plays in the various pathways in which it is involved and to summarise current knowledge on atypical CdLS associated with <i>BRD4</i> gene alterations, highlighting clinical features, molecular mechanisms, and implications for diagnostic assessment and patient care.

[7] Diagnosis and management of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-018-0031-0
    snippet: by AD Kline · 2018 · Cited by 527 — BRD4 interacts with NIPBL and BRD4 is mutated in a Cornelia de Lange-like syndrome. Nat. Genet. 50, 329–332 (2018). CAS PubMed PubMed ...
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is an archetypical genetic syndrome that is characterized by intellectual disability, well-defined facial features, upper limb anomalies and atypical growth, among numerous other signs and symptoms. It is caused by variants in any one of seven genes, all of which have a structural or regulatory function in the cohesin complex. Although recent advances in next-generation sequencing have improved molecular diagnostics, marked heterogeneity exists in clinical and molecular diagnostic approaches and care practices worldwide. Here, we outline a series of recommendations that document the consensus of a group of international experts on clinical diagnostic criteria, both for classic CdLS and non-classic CdLS phenotypes, molecular investigations, long-term management and care planning.

[8] Advancing the Clinical and Molecular Understanding of ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202402.0646
    snippet: BRD4 interacts with NIPBL and BRD4 is mutated in a Cornelia de Lange-like syndrome. ... children and adults with Cornelia de Lange syndrome.
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a complex genetic disorder with distinct facial features, growth limitations, and limb anomalies. Its broad clinical spectrum presents significant challenges in pediatric diagnosis and management. Due to cohesin complex mutations, the disorder's variable presentation requires extensive research to refine care and improve outcomes. This article provides a case series review of pediatric CdLS patients alongside a comprehensive literature review, exploring clinical variability and the relationship between genotypic changes and phenotypic outcomes. It also discusses the evolution of diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, emphasizing innovations in genetic testing, including detecting mosaicism and novel genetic variations. The aim is to synthesize case studies with current research to advance our understanding of CdLS and the effectiveness of management strategies in pediatric healthcare. This work highlights the need for an integrated, evidence-based approach to diagnosis and treatment. It aims to fill existing research gaps and advocate for holistic care protocols and tailored treatment plans for CdLS patients, ultimately improving their quality of life.

[9] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1104/
    snippet: by MA Deardorff · 2020 · Cited by 188 — BRD4-, MAU2-, NIPBL-, RAD21-, and SMC3-related Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) are autosomal dominant disorders typically caused by a de novo ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[10] Confirmation of BRD4 haploinsufficiency role in Cornelia de Lange–like phenotype and delineation of a 19p13.12p13.11 gene contiguous syndrome
    V Alesi, ML Dentici, S Loddo… (2019)
    DOI:10.1111/ahg.12289 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ahg.12289
    snippet: … Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetically and … Clinical examination at different ages disclosed a quite … clinical features (Figure 2, Table 1). We compared our patient's …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetically and clinical heterogeneous condition characterized by congenital malformation, intellectual disability, and peculiar dysmorphic features. Recently, BRD4 (19p13.12) was proposed as a new critical gene associated with a mild CdLS because of a similar presentation of the patients carrying point mutations and of its involvement in the NIPBL pathway. Patients harboring a 19p interstitial deletion shared some physical features with BRD4 mutation carriers, which results in a more complex phenotype because of the involvement of several neighboring genes. We report a new 19p deletion in a patient clinically diagnosed as CdLS, partially overlapping with previously published cases with the aim to support the role of BRD4 haploinsufficiency in a CdL-like phenotype and to improve the delineation of 19p13.12p13.11 deletion as a new nonrecurrent gene contiguous syndrome, spanning GIPC1, NOTCH3, BRD4, AKAP8, AKAP8L, CASP14, and EPS15L1 genes. Previously described cases are reviewed, attempting to delineate a genotype-phenotype correlation.