SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] De novo putative loss‐of‐function variants in TAF4 are associated with a neuro‐developmental disorder
    BDE Janssen, MJH van den Boogaard… (2022)
    DOI:10.1002/humu.24444 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/humu.24444
    snippet: … monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. … in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro‐… Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal …
    abstract: TATA-binding protein associated factor 4 (TAF4) is a subunit of the Transcription Factor IID (TFIID) complex, a central player in transcription initiation. Other members of this multimeric complex have been implicated previously as monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. TAF4 has not been described to date as a monogenic disease gene. We here present a cohort of eight individuals, each carrying de novo putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro-developmental disorder (NDD). Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin this novel disorder "TAF4-related NDD" (T4NDD). We place T4NDD in the context of other disorders related to TFIID subunits, revealing shared features of T4NDD with other TAF-opathies.

[2] X-exome sequencing of 405 unresolved families identifies seven novel intellectual disability genes
    H Hu, SA Haas, J Chelly, H Van Esch, M Raynaud… (2016)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/mp2014193
    snippet: … ATN1 (known ID protein) interacts with TAF4 and negatively regulates transcription of … families with intellectual disability--four novel mutations and two novel syndromic phenotypes. …
    abstract: X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder. During the past two decades in excess of 100 X-chromosome ID genes have been identified. Yet, a large number of families mapping to the X-chromosome remained unresolved suggesting that more XLID genes or loci are yet to be identified. Here, we have investigated 405 unresolved families with XLID. We employed massively parallel sequencing of all X-chromosome exons in the index males. The majority of these males were previously tested negative for copy number variations and for mutations in a subset of known XLID genes by Sanger sequencing. In total, 745 X-chromosomal genes were screened. After stringent filtering, a total of 1297 non-recurrent exonic variants remained for prioritization. Co-segregation analysis of potential clinically relevant changes revealed that 80 families (20%) carried pathogenic variants in established XLID genes. In 19 families, we detected likely causative protein truncating and missense variants in 7 novel and validated XLID genes (CLCN4, CNKSR2, FRMPD4, KLHL15, LAS1L, RLIM and USP27X) and potentially deleterious variants in 2 novel candidate XLID genes (CDK16 and TAF1). We show that the CLCN4 and CNKSR2 variants impair protein functions as indicated by electrophysiological studies and altered differentiation of cultured primary neurons from Clcn4(-/-) mice or after mRNA knock-down. The newly identified and candidate XLID proteins belong to pathways and networks with established roles in cognitive function and intellectual disability in particular. We suggest that systematic sequencing of all X-chromosomal genes in a cohort of patients with genetic evidence for X-chromosome locus involvement may resolve up to 58% of Fragile X-negative cases.

[3] Identifying rare genetic variants in 21 highly multiplex autism families: the role of diagnosis and autistic traits
    RP More, V Warrier, H Brunel, C Buckingham… (2023)
    PMID:36702863 DOI:10.1038/s41380-022-01938-4 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-022-01938-4
    snippet: … linking them to autism, intellectual disability, or co-occurring … Furthermore, TAF4 has been previously associated with … Finally, we did not have further phenotypic information such as …
    abstract: Autism is a highly heritable, heterogeneous, neurodevelopmental condition. Large-scale genetic studies, predominantly focussing on simplex families and clinical diagnoses of autism have identified hundreds of genes associated with autism. Yet, the contribution of these classes of genes to multiplex families and autistic traits still warrants investigation. Here, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of 21 highly multiplex autism families, with at least three autistic individuals in each family, to prioritise genes associated with autism. Using a combination of both autistic traits and clinical diagnosis of autism, we identify rare variants in genes associated with autism, and related neurodevelopmental conditions in multiple families. We identify a modest excess of these variants in autistic individuals compared to individuals without an autism diagnosis. Finally, we identify a convergence of the genes identified in molecular pathways related to development and neurogenesis. In sum, our analysis provides initial evidence to demonstrate the value of integrating autism diagnosis and autistic traits to prioritise genes.

[4] Loss of TAF8 causes TFIID dysfunction and p53-mediated apoptotic neuronal cell death
    F El (2022)
    PMID:35361962 DOI:10.1038/s41418-022-00982-5 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41418-022-00982-5
    snippet: … cause intellectual disability and other neurological disorders. … differential gene expression in the absence of TAF4 [38], TAF9B [… Huntington’s disease-like phenotype due to trinucleotide …
    abstract: Mutations in genes encoding general transcription factors cause neurological disorders. Despite clinical prominence, the consequences of defects in the basal transcription machinery during brain development are unclear. We found that loss of the TATA-box binding protein-associated factor TAF8, a component of the general transcription factor TFIID, in the developing central nervous system affected the expression of many, but notably not all genes. Taf8 deletion caused apoptosis, unexpectedly restricted to forebrain regions. Nuclear levels of the transcription factor p53 were elevated in the absence of TAF8, as were the mRNAs of the pro-apoptotic p53 target genes Noxa, Puma and Bax. The cell death in Taf8 forebrain regions was completely rescued by additional loss of p53, but Taf8 and p53 brains failed to initiate a neuronal expression program. Taf8 deletion caused aberrant transcription of promoter regions and splicing anomalies. We propose that TAF8 supports the directionality of transcription and co-transcriptional splicing, and that failure of these processes causes p53-induced apoptosis of neuronal cells in the developing mouse embryo.

[5] Microarray analysis on spontaneous abortions
    H Hauksdóttir
    https://skemman.is/handle/1946/18567
    snippet: … Breytingarnar virtust vera 34 bp arfhreint tap á útröð í TAF4 … devolopmental delay (DD)/intellectual disability (ID), autism … to contribute to an affected individuals clinical phenotype. The …

[6] De novo putative loss‐of‐function variants in TAF4 are ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10087332 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10087332/
    snippet: by BDE Janssen · 2022 · Cited by 11 — Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin ...
    abstract: TATA-binding protein associated factor 4 (TAF4) is a subunit of the Transcription Factor IID (TFIID) complex, a central player in transcription initiation. Other members of this multimeric complex have been implicated previously as monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. TAF4 has not been described to date as a monogenic disease gene. We here present a cohort of eight individuals, each carrying de novo putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro-developmental disorder (NDD). Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin this novel disorder "TAF4-related NDD" (T4NDD). We place T4NDD in the context of other disorders related to TFIID subunits, revealing shared features of T4NDD with other TAF-opathies.

[7] 620450 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620450
    snippet: One had prenatal increased nuchal translucency, premature birth, short stature, and intellectual disability. ... TAF4 are associated with a neuro-developmental ...

[8] De novo putative loss-of-function variants in TAF4 are ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:35904126 DOI:10.1002/humu.24444 https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/468915
    snippet: by BDE Janssen · 2022 · Cited by 10 — Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin ...
    abstract: TATA-binding protein associated factor 4 (TAF4) is a subunit of the Transcription Factor IID (TFIID) complex, a central player in transcription initiation. Other members of this multimeric complex have been implicated previously as monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. TAF4 has not been described to date as a monogenic disease gene. We here present a cohort of eight individuals, each carrying de novo putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro-developmental disorder (NDD). Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin this novel disorder "TAF4-related NDD" (T4NDD). We place T4NDD in the context of other disorders related to TFIID subunits, revealing shared features of T4NDD with other TAF-opathies.

[9] Intellectual Developmental Disorder, Autosomal Dominant 73
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/intellectual_developmental_disorder_autosomal_dominant_73
    snippet: ... intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe, developmental ... De novo putative loss-of-function variants in TAF4 are associated with a neuro- ...

[10] Gene: TAF4 (Intellectual disability)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/285/gene/TAF4/
    snippet: Phenotypes for gene: TAF4 were changed from Developmental disorder to intellectual disability, MONDO:0001071. 22 May 2023, Gel status: 2. Set publications.