SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … Using blood samples from six cohort members, we have established a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature as a molecular biomarker. Furthermore, we have derived …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] The predictive power of profiling the DNA methylome in human health and disease
    P Christofidou, CG Bell (2025)
    DOI:10.1080/17501911.2025.2500907 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17501911.2025.2500907
    snippet: … Here, we survey the current state of DNA methylation as a … MSL2, which is a component of the H4K16 acetylator MSL complex [85]. Recently, a diagnostic bloodderived episignature …
    abstract: Early and accurate diagnosis significantly improves the chances of disease survival. DNA methylation (5mC), the major DNA modification in the human genome, is now recognized as a biomarker of immense clinical potential. This is due to its ability to delineate precisely cell-type, quantitate both internal and external exposures, as well as tracking chronological and biological components of the aging process. Here, we survey the current state of DNA methylation as a biomarker and predictor of traits and disease. This includes Epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) findings that inform Methylation Risk Scores (MRS), EpiScore long-term estimators of plasma protein levels, and machine learning (ML) derived DNA methylation clocks. These all highlight the significant benefits of accessible peripheral blood DNA methylation as a surrogate measure. However, detailed DNA methylation biopsy analysis in real-time is also empowering pathological diagnosis. Furthermore, moving forward, in this multi-omic and biobank scale era, novel insights will be enabled by the amplified power of increasing sample sizes and data integration.

[3] Klinička vrijednost analize epigenetičkog potpisa u neurorazvojnim poremećajima
    M Dobrošević (2024)
    https://repozitorij.unizg.hr/object/mef:9941
    snippet: … DNA methylation episignature and comparative epigenomic profiling of HNRNPU-related neurodevelopmental disorder. Genet Med Off J Am Coll Med Genet. 2023 Aug;25(8):100871. …

[4] Looking back at 2024 in the European Journal of Human Genetics
    A McNeill (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-025-01800-5
    snippet: … of potentially associated dysmorphology in MSL2. Uctepe et al. … Studying DNA methylation patterns has led to the … evaluation of “real world” episignature performance [26]. They find …

[5] Epigenetic dysregulation of gastrointestinal tumors
    Z Huang, R Ma, Z Xiao, X Zhou (2026)
    https://www.oaepublish.com/articles/jtgg.2026.68
    snippet: … DNA methylation is the most extensively characterized epigenetic … DNA methylation is useful both as a disease mechanism and as a stratification marker. Therefore, DNA methylation …

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — Establishment of a specific episignature for the MSL2-related disorder. DNA methylation episignatures have been used as a reliable biomarker for ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://radygenomics.org/rss_publications/msl2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-with-lack-of-coordination-epilepsy-specific-dysmorphisms-and-a-distinct-episignature/
    snippet: MSL2 variants lead to a ... As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established.
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] EpiSignature Analysis
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.testmenu.com/cincinnatichildrens/TestDirectory/SiteFile?fileName=sidebar%5CEpiSignature%202_25-3%20July%202025.pdf
    snippet: MSL2-related syndrome* ... (2024) Diagnostic utility and reporting recommendations for clinical DNA methylation episignature testing in genetically undiagnosed ...

[9] Understanding the Impact of MSL2 Variants on ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://tinyeye.com/blog/understanding-the-impact-of-msl2-variants-on-neurodevelopmental-disorders-a-guide-for-practitioners.php
    snippet: A significant outcome of this research is the establishment of a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature as a molecular biomarker for MSL2-related ...

[10] MSL2 Gene - Ma'ayan Lab – Computational Systems Biology
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38815585 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.05.001 https://maayanlab.cloud/Harmonizome/gene/MSL2
    snippet: ... episignature. Am J Hum Genet (2024) DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.05.001 PMID ... cell types and tissues with high or low DNA methylation of MSL2 gene ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.