SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis from molecular understanding to clinical disease
    M Alfadhel, M Nashabat, QA Ali, K Hundallah (2017)
    https://nsj.org.sa/content/22/1/4.short
    snippet: … A reduction reaction then takes place by FDX2 and FDXR to … mitochondrial ISCs biogenesis disorders is hyperglycinemia, … bound cofactor essential for glycine cleavage system (GCS), …
    abstract: Iron_sulfur clusters (ISCs) are known to play a major role in various protein functions. Located in the mitochondria, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus, they contribute to various core cellular functions. Until recently, only a few human diseases related to mitochondrial ISC biogenesis defects have been described. Such diseases include Friedreich ataxia, combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 19, infantile complex II/III deficiency defect, hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis and mitochondrial muscle myopathy, lipoic acid biosynthesis defects, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia due to glutaredoxin 5 gene defect. Disorders of mitochondrial import, export and translation, including sideroblastic anemia with ataxia, EVEN-PLUS syndrome and mitochondrial complex I deficiency due to nucleotide-binding protein-like protein gene defect, have also been implicated in ISC biogenesis defects. With advances in next generation sequencing technologies, more disorders related to ISC biogenesis defects are expected to be elucidated. In this article, we aim to shed the light on mitochondrial ISC biogenesis, related proteins and their function, pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes of related disorders, diagnostic approach, and future implications.

[2] Disorders of Lipoic Acid and Iron-Sulfur Protein Metabolism
    A Ribes, F Tort (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-67727-5_27 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-67727-5_27
    snippet: … with a fatal mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidemia, hyperglycinemia, and deficiencies in … Then, the coordinated action of FDX1, FDX2, and FDXR allows the final assembly of the […

[3] A Case of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 1 and Review of the Literature
    CR DiFalco, A Williams, C Soler‐Alfonso… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.70213 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.70213
    snippet: … sex, and whether PAH and hyperglycinemia were present, are documented … hyperglycinemia, which is specific to subsets of MMDS as well as other disorders related to either the glycine …
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1, MIM #605711) due to NFU1 gene defects is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism associated with reduced function of NFU1 iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) scaffold protein. This disorder demonstrates variable clinical features including hypotonia, epileptic encephalopathy, respiratory failure, lactic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, and hemodynamic instability. One unique feature of this mitochondrial disorder is the common manifestation of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), for which the pathophysiologic mechanism is not well defined to date. Here, we report a case of infantile-onset lactic acidosis, refractory epilepsy with encephalopathy, hyperglycinemia, and severe PAH in a patient who underwent rapid genome sequencing (GS) which identified compound heterozygous variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We additionally review the literature on published cases of MMDS1 including developments in the understanding of the intracellular impact of defective ISC proteins. Recent studies delineate a multifactorial pathogenesis including globally dysregulated energy metabolism, specific deficiencies in oxidative phosphorylation, and excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. A key difference between established animal models of this disorder and human cases published to date is that the previously described sex-based phenotype discrepancy in rats was not recapitulated in this review. Identification of the clinical combination of lactic acidosis, PAH, and hyperglycinemia during diagnostic evaluation should raise suspicion for a defect of the ISC pathway, and further investigations of the cellular pathophysiology of this disorder may provide insight into the phenotypic spectrum of human disease and potential therapeutic targets.

[4] Mitochondrial diseases: expanding the diagnosis in the era of genetic testing
    RP Saneto (2020)
    PMC7791531 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7791531/
    snippet: … Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is an autosomal disorder characterized by variants in the glycine cleavage … Variants in FDXR diminished iron-sulfur cluster assembly and induce …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases are clinically and genetically heterogeneous. These diseases were initially described a little over three decades ago. Limited diagnostic tools created disease descriptions based on clinical, biochemical analytes, neuroimaging, and muscle biopsy findings. This diagnostic mechanism continued to evolve detection of inherited oxidative phosphorylation disorders and expanded discovery of mitochondrial physiology over the next two decades. Limited genetic testing hampered the definitive diagnostic identification and breadth of diseases. Over the last decade, the development and incorporation of massive parallel sequencing has identified approximately 300 genes involved in mitochondrial disease. Gene testing has enlarged our understanding of how genetic defects lead to cellular dysfunction and disease. These findings have expanded the understanding of how mechanisms of mitochondrial physiology can induce dysfunction and disease, but the complete collection of disease-causing gene variants remains incomplete. This article reviews the developments in disease gene discovery and the incorporation of gene findings with mitochondrial physiology. This understanding is critical to the development of targeted therapies.

[5] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis and neurological disorders
    A Selvanathan, BP Sankaran (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567724921001446
    snippet: … Patients can have raised plasma and CSF glycine and lactate, but this is not ubiquitous. Brain MRI is consistent with a leukodystrophy, with cerebellar white matter abnormalities and …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur clusters (ISCs) are highly conserved moieties embedded into numerous crucial proteins in almost all bacteria, plants and mammals. As such, ISC biosynthesis is critical to cellular function. The pathway was first characterized in bacteria by the late 1990s, and over the subsequent 20 years there has been increasing understanding of its components in humans. Defects in the ISC pathway are now associated with many different human disease states, such as Friedreich ataxia and ISCU myopathy. Whilst the disorders have variable clinical features, most involve neurological phenotypes. There are common biochemical signatures in most of these conditions, as a lack of ISCs causes deficiencies of target proteins including Complex I, II and III, aconitase and lipoic acid. This review focuses on the disorders of ISC biogenesis that have been described in the literature to-date. Key clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological features will be discussed, providing a reference point for clinicians diagnosing and managing these patients. Therapies are mostly supportive at this stage. However, the improved understanding of the pathophysiology of these conditions could pave the way for disease-modifying therapies in the near future.

[6] MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS SYNDROME 7; ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620423?search=prefix%3A%23&highlight=None
    snippet: Infantile glycine encephal… Atypical glycine encephalo… Glycine ... Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 2 with hyperglycinemia ... 617717 · FDXR · 103270.

[7] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis from molecular ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:28064324 DOI:10.17712/nsj.2017.1.20160542 https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/a825/0e835005b7fe8a4e0fc1b3e3c74333e0244d.pdf
    snippet: multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia ... and Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) ... classical non ketotic hyperglycinemia caused by ...
    abstract: Iron_sulfur clusters (ISCs) are known to play a major role in various protein functions. Located in the mitochondria, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus, they contribute to various core cellular functions. Until recently, only a few human diseases related to mitochondrial ISC biogenesis defects have been described. Such diseases include Friedreich ataxia, combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 19, infantile complex II/III deficiency defect, hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis and mitochondrial muscle myopathy, lipoic acid biosynthesis defects, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia due to glutaredoxin 5 gene defect. Disorders of mitochondrial import, export and translation, including sideroblastic anemia with ataxia, EVEN-PLUS syndrome and mitochondrial complex I deficiency due to nucleotide-binding protein-like protein gene defect, have also been implicated in ISC biogenesis defects. With advances in next generation sequencing technologies, more disorders related to ISC biogenesis defects are expected to be elucidated. In this article, we aim to shed the light on mitochondrial ISC biogenesis, related proteins and their function, pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes of related disorders, diagnostic approach, and future implications.

[8] Clinical and genetic aspects of defects in the mitochondrial iron–sulfur cluster synthesis pathway
    AV Vanlander, R Van Coster (2018)
    DOI:10.1007/s00775-018-1550-z https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00775-018-1550-z
    snippet: … FDXR deficiency has only recently been reported. In one … cohort of patients with non-ketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH). In contrast … This was also the case for CSF and plasma glycine [59]. …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur clusters are evolutionarily conserved biological structures which play an important role as cofactor for multiple enzymes in eukaryotic cells. The biosynthesis pathways of the iron-sulfur clusters are located in the mitochondria and in the cytosol. The mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis pathway (ISC) can be divided into at least twenty enzymatic steps. Since the description of frataxin deficiency as the cause of Friedreich's ataxia, multiple other deficiencies in ISC biosynthesis pathway have been reported. In this paper, an overview is given of the clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects reported in humans affected by a defect in iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis.

[9] Molecular basis of rare diseases associated to the maturation of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S]-containing proteins
    F Camponeschi, S Ciofi (2022)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2218-273X/12/7/1009
    snippet: … in lactate and glycine concentrations in CSF and blood [79]. … ISCA2 gene mutations is hyperglycinemia. The main clinical … , muscle weakness and axonal polyneuropathy [96]. While no …
    abstract: The importance of mitochondria in mammalian cells is widely known. Several biochemical reactions and pathways take place within mitochondria: among them, there are those involving the biogenesis of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters. The latter are evolutionarily conserved, ubiquitous inorganic cofactors, performing a variety of functions, such as electron transport, enzymatic catalysis, DNA maintenance, and gene expression regulation. The synthesis and distribution of Fe-S clusters are strictly controlled cellular processes that involve several mitochondrial proteins that specifically interact each other to form a complex machinery (Iron Sulfur Cluster assembly machinery, ISC machinery hereafter). This machinery ensures the correct assembly of both [2Fe-2S] and [4Fe-4S] clusters and their insertion in the mitochondrial target proteins. The present review provides a structural and molecular overview of the rare diseases associated with the genes encoding for the accessory proteins of the ISC machinery (i.e., GLRX5, ISCA1, ISCA2, IBA57, FDX2, BOLA3, IND1 and NFU1) involved in the assembly and insertion of [4Fe-4S] clusters in mitochondrial proteins. The disease-related missense mutations were mapped on the 3D structures of these accessory proteins or of their protein complexes, and the possible impact that these mutations have on their specific activity/function in the frame of the mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] protein biogenesis is described.

[10] Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia - GeneReviews® - NCBI Bookshelf
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:32310600 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1357/
    snippet: by JLK Van Hove · 2019 · Cited by 92 — CSF glycine elevated >230 μmol/L predicts severe outcome; a CSF:plasma glycine ratio of <0.08 predicts attenuated outcome [Swanson et al 2015].
    abstract: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a rare genetic disease caused by an inborn error in glycine metabolism. Due to a mutation in the glycine cleavage enzyme system, patients cannot break down glycine, ultimately leading to glycine accumulation throughout the body. The buildup of glycine primarily occurs in the spinal cord and brain; thus, this condition's initial clinical manifestations and long-term sequelae are more often neurological in origin. No known interventions are effective in altering the natural history of nonketotic hyperglycinemia, but available therapeutic strategies may reduce the comorbidities associated with this condition. Clinicians should recognize this disease and initiate early evaluation and treatment to achieve the best possible outcome.