SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The 2025 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2025)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(24)01757-7/abstract
    snippet: … Gene symbol and OMIM number … Muscular dystrophy with cardiomyopathy and triangular tongue (Formerly LGMD2W) 1.55 AR MDRCMTT (LGMD2W) 616827 2q14.3 LIMS2 (= PINCH2…

[2] Expert panel curation of 31 genes in relation to limb girdle muscular dystrophy
    S Mohan, S McNulty, C Thaxton… (2024)
    PMID:39215466 DOI:10.1002/acn3.52127 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.52127
    snippet: … be related to more than one disease entity in OMIM or the literature. We took into consideration … SNUPN deficiency causes a recessive muscular dystrophy due to RNA mis-splicing and …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of genetically heterogeneous autosomal conditions with some degree of phenotypic homogeneity. LGMD is defined as having onset >2 years of age with progressive proximal weakness, elevated serum creatine kinase levels and dystrophic features on muscle biopsy. Advances in massively parallel sequencing have led to a surge in genes linked to LGMD.<h4>Methods</h4>The ClinGen Muscular Dystrophies and Myopathies gene curation expert panel (MDM GCEP, formerly Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy GCEP) convened to evaluate the strength of evidence supporting gene-disease relationships (GDR) using the ClinGen gene-disease clinical validity framework to evaluate 31 genes implicated in LGMD.<h4>Results</h4>The GDR was exclusively LGMD for 17 genes, whereas an additional 14 genes were related to a broader phenotype encompassing congenital weakness. Four genes (CAPN3, COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3) were split into two separate disease entities, based on each displaying both dominant and recessive inheritance patterns, resulting in curation of 35 GDRs. Of these, 30 (86%) were classified as definitive, 4 (11%) as moderate, and 1 (3%) as limited. Two genes, POMGNT1 and DAG1, though definitively related to myopathy, currently have insufficient evidence to support a relationship specifically with LGMD.<h4>Interpretation</h4>The expert-reviewed assertions on the clinical validity of genes implicated in LGMDs form an invaluable resource for clinicians and molecular geneticists. We encourage the global neuromuscular community to publish case-level data that help clarify disputed or novel LGMD associations.

[3] Identifikace a interpretace genetických variant u pacientů s neuromuskulárním onemocněním
    J Kopčilová
    https://is.muni.cz/th/s064h/
    snippet: … Czech patients with limb girdle muscular dystrophy diagnosed between … OMIM), while a single condition may be caused by variants in numerous different genes (for instance, limb girdle …

[4] Facing the challenges to shorten the diagnostic odyssey: first Whole Genome Sequencing experience of a Colombian cohort with suspected rare diseases
    HM Velasco, A Bertoli (2024)
    PMID:38909121 DOI:10.1038/s41431-024-01609-8 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01609-8
    snippet: … and subcortical band heterotopia (OMIM: *601545, patient … a novel common variant in SNUPN. This helped to establish … previously unrecognized subtype of muscular dystrophy [43]. …
    abstract: Exome and genome sequencing (ES/GS) are routinely used for the diagnosis of genetic diseases in developed countries. However, their implementation is limited in countries from Latin America. We aimed to describe the results of GS in patients with suspected rare genetic diseases in Colombia. We studied 501 patients from 22 healthcare sites from January to December 2022. GS was performed in the index cases using dried blood spots on filtercards. Ancestry analysis was performed under iAdmix. Multiomic testing was performed when needed (biomarker, enzymatic activity, RNA-seq). All tests were performed at an accredited genetic laboratory. Ethnicity prediction data confirmed that 401 patients (80%) were mainly of Amerindian origin. A genetic diagnosis was established for 142 patients with a 28.3% diagnostic yield. The highest diagnostic yield was achieved for pathologies with a metabolic component and syndromic disorders (p < 0.001). Young children had a median of 1 year of diagnostic odyssey, while the median time for adults was significantly longer (15 years). Patients with genetic syndromes have spent more than 75% of their life without a diagnosis, while for patients with neurologic and neuromuscular diseases, the time of the diagnostic odyssey tended to decrease with age. Previous testing, specifically karyotyping or chromosomal microarray were significantly associated with a longer time to reach a definitive diagnosis (p < 0.01). Furthermore, one out of five patients that had an ES before could be diagnosed by GS. The Colombian genome project is the first Latin American study reporting the experience of systematic use of diagnostic GS in rare diseases.

[5] The 2026 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2026)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(25)01030-2/abstract
    snippet: … linked to PubMed and to major databases related to molecular medicine (Leiden Muscular Dystrophy, OMIM, NCBI, Genatlas, Orphanet, GeneCards). It … Gene symbol and OMIM number …

[6] 620793 - MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620793
    snippet: ... OMIM - (OMIM.ORG). Toggle navigation ... Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features.

[7] Gene: SNUPN (Limb girdle muscular dystrophies ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/185/gene/SNUPN/
    snippet: Muscular dystrophy, limb-girdle, autosomal recessive 29, OMIM:620793. OMIM: 607902; Clinvar variants: Variants in SNUPN; Penetrance: None; Publications.

[8] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features ... According to the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[9] autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 29
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.alliancegenome.org/disease/DOID:0061134
    snippet: ... SNUPN gene on chromosome 15q24. [1]. Synonyms. LGMDR29. Cross References. MIM:620793. Parent Terms. autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy ... OMIM ...

[10] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. … carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN, which encodes Snurportin-1, showing a LGMD …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.