SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Phenotypic continuum of NFU1‐related disorders
    R Kaiyrzhanov, MS Zaki, T Lau, S Sen… (2022)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.51679 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.51679
    snippet: … that MMDS1 and HSP could be the two ends of the NFU1-… pure to complex hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) characterized by … Expanding the genotype-phenotype spectrum of ISCA2-…

[2] A genetic mimic of cerebral palsy: Homozygous NFU1 mutation with marked intrafamilial phenotypic variation
    TA Uzunhan, NE Çakar, S Seyhan, K Aydin (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0387760420301911
    snippet: … new spastic paraplegia phenotype that had not been reported to that point, which was associated with NFU1 in a 30-year-old patient with spastic paraplegia … to use genotype-phenotype …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Genetic defects in the NFU1, an iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein coding gene, which is vital in the final stage of assembly for iron sulfur proteins, have been defined as multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome I. This disorder is a severe autosomal recessive disease with onset in early infancy. It is characterized by disruption of the energy metabolism, resulting in weakness, neurological regression, hyperglycinemia, lactic acidosis, and early death.<h4>Patient description</h4>This report documents the case of a 27-month-old girl, who showed clinical signs and symptoms of spastic paraparesis with a relapsing-remitting course. The patient had a sister with a severe phenotype who died at the age of 16 months.<h4>Results</h4>Magnetic resonance imaging revealed hyperintensity of the cerebral white matter that was more prominent in the frontal regions, with milder involvement in the posterior periventricular regions. There was also evidence of partial cystic degeneration and cavitation in the frontal regions. In addition, she had hyperglycinemia. Homozygous NM_001002755.4:c.565G>A (p.Gly189Arg) mutation was identified in the NFU1 gene; this had not previously been reported as homozygous.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Hyperglycinemia and cavitating leukodystrophy are suggestive of an NFU1 mutation diagnosis. An intrafamilial phenotypic variation has not been published in NFU1-associated disorders before. Presenting with spasticity as a rare phenotype, NFU1 mutations could be considered a genetic mimic of cerebral palsy.

[3] Children with suspected hereditary spastic paraplegia clearly benefit from whole exome analysis
    D Safka Brozkova, J Paulasova Schwabova… (2026)
    DOI:10.1186/s40246-026-00935-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s40246-026-00935-w
    snippet: … NFU1, reported presentations range from severe multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1… -onset pure or complex hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) with prolonged …
    abstract: BACKGROUND: Establish a genetic diagnosis in patients referred for clinical suspicion of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). The cohort of 134 paediatric patients was divided into three groups according to age at symptom onset: group A (0–5 years, n = 82), group B (5–10 years, n = 32), and group C (10–18 years, n = 20). Exome sequencing was followed by virtual panel evaluation of HSP associated genes. In patients with a negative result, full exome evaluation was subsequently performed. RESULTS: We established the genetic diagnosis in 31% of patients across all the groups, representing 41 index patients from 41 unrelated families. In the group A, the diagnostic yield increased by up to one-third when panel analysis was followed by full exome analysis, reaching 37%. In group B, 18% of patients were diagnosed using either a virtual panel or a combination of virtual panel and exome analysis. In group C, panel testing alone provided a 25% yield, with no additional benefit from exome evaluation. We confirmed 10 de novo variants comprising 19% of all detected variants, and except for one, all were detected in the group A. In the majority of solved patients, the diagnosis of HSP was confirmed by the detection of a pathogenic variant in an HSP-associated gene. However, in 32% of cases, the final diagnosis corresponded to a different rare neurological disorder, caused by a pathogenic variant in a gene associated with a condition other than HSP. Among the genetically solved patients with HSP our data suggest that autosomal dominant forms (82%) may be more common than autosomal recessive forms (18%) in paediatric patients in the Czech Republic. CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated that exome sequencing with virtual panel evaluation, followed by analysis of the full exome data according to HPO terms, is the most suitable approach, particularly for young paediatric patients.

[4] A Case of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 1 and Review of the Literature
    CR DiFalco, A Williams, C Soler‐Alfonso… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.70213 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.70213
    snippet: … variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We … of autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia with certain … There is limited ability to elucidate genotype–phenotype rela…
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1, MIM #605711) due to NFU1 gene defects is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism associated with reduced function of NFU1 iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) scaffold protein. This disorder demonstrates variable clinical features including hypotonia, epileptic encephalopathy, respiratory failure, lactic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, and hemodynamic instability. One unique feature of this mitochondrial disorder is the common manifestation of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), for which the pathophysiologic mechanism is not well defined to date. Here, we report a case of infantile-onset lactic acidosis, refractory epilepsy with encephalopathy, hyperglycinemia, and severe PAH in a patient who underwent rapid genome sequencing (GS) which identified compound heterozygous variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We additionally review the literature on published cases of MMDS1 including developments in the understanding of the intracellular impact of defective ISC proteins. Recent studies delineate a multifactorial pathogenesis including globally dysregulated energy metabolism, specific deficiencies in oxidative phosphorylation, and excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. A key difference between established animal models of this disorder and human cases published to date is that the previously described sex-based phenotype discrepancy in rats was not recapitulated in this review. Identification of the clinical combination of lactic acidosis, PAH, and hyperglycinemia during diagnostic evaluation should raise suspicion for a defect of the ISC pathway, and further investigations of the cellular pathophysiology of this disorder may provide insight into the phenotypic spectrum of human disease and potential therapeutic targets.

[5] Molecular basis of rare diseases associated to the maturation of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S]-containing proteins
    F Camponeschi, S Ciofi (2022)
    PMID:35883565 DOI:10.3390/biom12071009 https://www.mdpi.com/2218-273X/12/7/1009
    snippet: … variants in the NFU1 gene cause MMDS type 1 (MMDS1, MIM… in NFU1 have been identified to date in patients affected by … to adolescent-onset spastic paraplegia. Several patients …
    abstract: The importance of mitochondria in mammalian cells is widely known. Several biochemical reactions and pathways take place within mitochondria: among them, there are those involving the biogenesis of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters. The latter are evolutionarily conserved, ubiquitous inorganic cofactors, performing a variety of functions, such as electron transport, enzymatic catalysis, DNA maintenance, and gene expression regulation. The synthesis and distribution of Fe-S clusters are strictly controlled cellular processes that involve several mitochondrial proteins that specifically interact each other to form a complex machinery (Iron Sulfur Cluster assembly machinery, ISC machinery hereafter). This machinery ensures the correct assembly of both [2Fe-2S] and [4Fe-4S] clusters and their insertion in the mitochondrial target proteins. The present review provides a structural and molecular overview of the rare diseases associated with the genes encoding for the accessory proteins of the ISC machinery (i.e., GLRX5, ISCA1, ISCA2, IBA57, FDX2, BOLA3, IND1 and NFU1) involved in the assembly and insertion of [4Fe-4S] clusters in mitochondrial proteins. The disease-related missense mutations were mapped on the 3D structures of these accessory proteins or of their protein complexes, and the possible impact that these mutations have on their specific activity/function in the frame of the mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] protein biogenesis is described.

[6] Patient-specific variants of NFU1/NFU-1 disrupt cholinergic ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC9922734 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9922734/
    snippet: by PA Kropp · 2023 · Cited by 1 — ... genotype/phenotype relationship of individual MMDS1 patients. Although more ... New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1.
    abstract: Neuromuscular dysfunction is a common feature of mitochondrial diseases and frequently presents as ataxia, spasticity and/or dystonia, all of which can severely impact individuals with mitochondrial diseases. Dystonia is one of the most common symptoms of multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1), a disease associated with mutations in the causative gene (NFU1) that impair iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. We have generated Caenorhabditis elegans strains that recreated patient-specific point variants in the C. elegans ortholog (nfu-1) that result in allele-specific dysfunction. Each of these mutants, Gly147Arg and Gly166Cys, have altered acetylcholine signaling at neuromuscular junctions, but opposite effects on activity and motility. We found that the Gly147Arg variant was hypersensitive to acetylcholine and that knockdown of acetylcholine release rescued nearly all neuromuscular phenotypes of this variant. In contrast, we found that the Gly166Cys variant caused predominantly postsynaptic acetylcholine hypersensitivity due to an unclear mechanism. These results are important for understanding the neuromuscular conditions of MMDS1 patients and potential avenues for therapeutic intervention.

[7] Patient-specific variants of NFU1/NFU-1 disrupt cholinergic signaling in a model of multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1
    PA Kropp, P Rogers, SE Kelly… (2023)
    PMID:36645076 DOI:10.1242/dmm.049594 https://journals.biologists.com/dmm/article-abstract/16/2/dmm049594/286824
    snippet: … MMDS1 by recreating exact patient-specific NFU1 variants in the C. elegans ortholog NFU-1… pathway could cause the paralysis phenotypes observed in the nfu-1 variants. We thus …
    abstract: Neuromuscular dysfunction is a common feature of mitochondrial diseases and frequently presents as ataxia, spasticity and/or dystonia, all of which can severely impact individuals with mitochondrial diseases. Dystonia is one of the most common symptoms of multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1), a disease associated with mutations in the causative gene (NFU1) that impair iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. We have generated Caenorhabditis elegans strains that recreated patient-specific point variants in the C. elegans ortholog (nfu-1) that result in allele-specific dysfunction. Each of these mutants, Gly147Arg and Gly166Cys, have altered acetylcholine signaling at neuromuscular junctions, but opposite effects on activity and motility. We found that the Gly147Arg variant was hypersensitive to acetylcholine and that knockdown of acetylcholine release rescued nearly all neuromuscular phenotypes of this variant. In contrast, we found that the Gly166Cys variant caused predominantly postsynaptic acetylcholine hypersensitivity due to an unclear mechanism. These results are important for understanding the neuromuscular conditions of MMDS1 patients and potential avenues for therapeutic intervention.

[8] Novel NFU1 Variants Induced MMDS Behaved as Special Leukodystrophy in Chinese Sufferers
    D Jin, T Yu, L Zhang, T Wang, J Hu, Y Wang… (2017)
    PMID:28470589 DOI:10.1007/s12031-017-0927-8 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12031-017-0927-8
    snippet: … To our knowledge, these two sites are novel candidate mutation types of NFU1 gene for the occurrence of MMDS1. Sanger sequencing argued that c.721G > T mutation is passed from …
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome (MMDS) is an autosomal recessive disorder of systemic energy metabolism. This study is to present the diagnosis of two MMDS Chinese sufferers. Physical and auxiliary examination was performed. Next generation sequencing (NGS) was conducted to identify candidate causal genes and Sanger sequencing was adopted to validate the variants detected. Fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain reaction (FQ-PCR) amplification was carried out to testify allelic loss existence. Structural investigation was performed to study the possibility of the candidate variants for disease onset. Physical examination showed that the children were with neurological impairment. Auxiliary examination demonstrated energy metabolism disturbance and abnormal brain signals. NGS found that the probands had homozygous mutation of c.545 + 5G > A and compound heterozygous variants of exon 4 deletion and c.721G > T in NFU1, respectively. NFU1 was considered as candidate molecular etiology and indicating that the kids were with MMDS. Sanger sequencing confirmed the variants. FQ-PCR amplification characterized that patient 1 had a de novo allele mutation while patient 2 inherited from his parents. Structural investigation demonstrated that the variants were possible for MMDS occurrence. This is the first report of patients diagnosed as MMDS with novel mutation types from the Asia-Pacific region.

[9] 620938 - SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 93, AUTOSOMAL ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620938
    snippet: autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia-93 (SPG93) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the NFU1 gene (608100) on chromosome 2p13.

[10] Spastic Paraplegia 93, Autosomal Recessive (SPG93)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/spastic_paraplegia_93_autosomal_recessive
    snippet: Autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 93 (SPG93) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the NFU1 gene on chromosome 2p13.