SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … microphthalmia … ocular phenotypes were not assessed in Kdm2b ΔCxxC animals, ~40% of mouse embryos lacking full-length Kdm2b displayed neural tube defects, retinal coloboma …
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[2] The histone H3K36 demethylase Fbxl11 plays pivotal roles in the development of retinal late‐born cell types
    T Iwagawa, M Fukushima, S Takeuchi… (2023)
    PMID:37073980 DOI:10.1111/gtc.13028 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/gtc.13028
    snippet: … at promoters of these genes led to the Fbxl11-CKO phenotypes (Figure 5f). Next, we focused on … loss of rod photoreceptor cells and ultimately microphthalmia. However, once retinal …
    abstract: Histone methylation plays a vital role in retinal development. However, the role of histone H3K36 methylation in retinal development is not clear. We examined the role of H3K36 methylation by loss-of-function analysis of H3K36me1/2 demethylases, Fbxl10, and Fbxl11. We analyzed the effect of knockout of these genes in the developing and mature retina on retinal development. Knockout of Fbxl10 specifically in the developing retina did not result in gross developmental abnormalities. Although adult rod photoreceptor-specific knockout of Fbxl11 in mature retinas did not result in morphological abnormalities, Fbxl11 knockout in developing retinas increased apoptosis, suppressed the proliferation of retinal progenitor cells, and resulted in microphthalmia. Morphological analysis revealed perturbed differentiation of rod photoreceptor and bipolar cells. RNA-seq of retinas at P7 showed markedly decreased expression of genes characterizing rod photoreceptor and bipolar cells in Fbxl11-knockout retinas. In addition, perturbation of alternative splicing increased intron retention in Fbxl11-knockout retinas. Genome-wide evaluation of the H3K36 methylation status revealed that Fbxl11 knockout altered the distribution of H3K36me2/3 in genes important for rod photoreceptor development. Taken together, we show that Fbxl11 plays pivotal roles in the development of retinal late-born cell types and may contribute to tight control of H3K36 methylation during retinal development.

[3] Investigation of CHD7 Function in Developmental Models of CHARGE Syndrome
    SA Balow (2014)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/a674d4e724bc2a49df01f683860e3217/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … clinical presentation…… 23 Ocular coloboma……………………… Rescue of chd7 morphant phenotype upon knockdown of … cardinal features of the syndrome including ocular coloboma, …

[4] The role of the transcriptional corepressor Bcor in embryonic stem cells and mouse development
    JA Wamstad (2009)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/5fe3aff9c369e1a7ca2155e611681863/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750
    snippet: … fish developed colobomas, a common ocular defect present in … ocular defects including coloboma, microphthalmia and optic nerve irregularities, consistent with the OFCD phenotype. …

[5] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: We describe three patients with variants in the CxxC DNA-binding domain of KDM2B with a consistent clinical phenotype, characterized primarily by global developmental delay, mild variable facial dysmorphism, various congenital anomalies, and consistent ophthalmologic and dermatologic involvement.
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[6] KDM2B-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case-Series ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41457890 DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41457890/
    snippet: This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[7] KDM2B-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case-Series ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://visualize.jove.com/41457890-kdm2b-related-neurodevelopmental-disorder-a-case-series-supporting-the-cxxc-domain-phenotype-with-emphasis-on-ocular-and-dermatologic-features
    snippet: KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a rare Mendelian disorder affecting epigenetic regulation. Pathogenic variants in KDM2B, particularly in the CxxC DNA-binding domain, are linked to a specific epigenetic signature.
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[8] Dysregulation of cotranscriptional alternative splicing underlies CHARGE syndrome
    C Bélanger, FA Bérubé (2018)
    DOI:10.1073/pnas.1715378115 https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1715378115
    snippet: … undefined CHARGE patients may harbor pathogenic variants … drug for the treatment of CHARGE syndrome but that more … showing that knockdown of kdm2b can partially rescue chd7 …
    abstract: CHARGE syndrome-which stands for coloboma of the eye, heart defects, atresia of choanae, retardation of growth/development, genital abnormalities, and ear anomalies-is a severe developmental disorder with wide phenotypic variability, caused mainly by mutations in <i>CHD7</i> (chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 7), known to encode a chromatin remodeler. The genetic lesions responsible for <i>CHD7</i> mutation-negative cases are unknown, at least in part because the pathogenic mechanisms underlying CHARGE syndrome remain poorly defined. Here, we report the characterization of a mouse model for <i>CHD7</i> mutation-negative cases of CHARGE syndrome generated by insertional mutagenesis of <i>Fam172a</i> (family with sequence similarity 172, member A). We show that Fam172a plays a key role in the regulation of cotranscriptional alternative splicing, notably by interacting with Ago2 (Argonaute-2) and Chd7. Validation studies in a human cohort allow us to propose that dysregulation of cotranscriptional alternative splicing is a unifying pathogenic mechanism for both <i>CHD7</i> mutation-positive and <i>CHD7</i> mutation-negative cases. We also present evidence that such splicing defects can be corrected in vitro by acute rapamycin treatment.

[9] Identification of DNA Methylation Episignatures for Classification and Phenotype/Genotype Correlation in Mendelian Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    J Reilly (2022)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/4d490a4ccf210a521542a90c7adc68e6/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … of KDM2B variant carriers. … phenotypic overlap when diagnosis based on clinical features is difficult. For example, in the case of CHARGE syndrome (MIM#214800) caused by variants …

[10] Epigenetic regulation of retinal development
    R Raeisossadati, MFR Ferrari, AH Kihara, I AlDiri… (2021)
    PMID:33563331 DOI:10.1186/s13072-021-00384-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13072-021-00384-w
    snippet: … novel treatment strategies targeting a variety of retinal disorders. … Among all histone H1 variants, Hist1h1c has the highest … Fbxl10 (Kdm2b) is a JmjC domain-containing histone …
    abstract: In the developing vertebrate retina, retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) proliferate and give rise to terminally differentiated neurons with exquisite spatio-temporal precision. Lineage commitment, fate determination and terminal differentiation are controlled by intricate crosstalk between the genome and epigenome. Indeed, epigenetic regulation plays pivotal roles in numerous cell fate specification and differentiation events in the retina. Moreover, aberrant chromatin structure can contribute to developmental disorders and retinal pathologies. In this review, we highlight recent advances in our understanding of epigenetic regulation in the retina. We also provide insight into several aspects of epigenetic-related regulation that should be investigated in future studies of retinal development and disease. Importantly, focusing on these mechanisms could contribute to the development of novel treatment strategies targeting a variety of retinal disorders.