SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 in Ashkenazi Jews
    R Birnbaum, S Ezer, NS Lotan, A Eilat… (2024)
    https://jmg.bmj.com/content/61/3/289.abstract
    snippet: … in individuals with NDDs and short stature. This finding … intellectual disability. They all share a common homozygous frameshift variant in SGSM3, which segregated with the phenotype …

[2] A Strong Candidate Gene for Nonsyndromic Intellectual Disability Phenotype: SGSM3
    A Turkyilmaz, KA Saglam, M Yilmaz… (2025)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.14631 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.14631
    snippet: … SGSM3 gene in two siblings with short stature and ID findings. The report of two cases with bi- allelic LOF variants in the SGSM3 … for the nonsyndromic ID phenotype. Functional studies …
    abstract: SGSM proteins are small modulator proteins interacting with proteins in the RAS signaling pathway. Studies with mouse and human tissues indicated that SGSM genes were highly expressed in the brain and could be expressed at different levels at different stages of development in fetal and adult brain tissue. It was first reported by Birnbaum et al. that the SGSM3 gene might be associated with a Mendelian inherited disease in families of Ashkenazi Jews with clinical manifestations of intellectual disability (ID). In this study, a novel homozygous stop-gain (NM_015705.6: c.1576C>T: p.(Arg526Ter)) variation was detected in the SGSM3 gene in two siblings with short stature and ID findings. The report of two cases with bi-allelic LOF variants in the SGSM3 gene from different populations with similar clinical manifestations strengthens the potential of this gene as a candidate gene for the nonsyndromic ID phenotype. Functional studies are required to investigate the signaling pathways affected by SGSM3 gene variations to produce the ID phenotype and their effect on the functioning of neurons.

[3] and known genes for autism spectrum disorders (ASD) with representation on high resolution chromosome ideograms. OA Autism 2014 Mar 25; 2 (1): 5.
    MG Butler, SK Rafi, AM Manzardo (2014)
    https://www.academia.edu/download/84742823/1397302130.pdf
    snippet: … Meaningful correlations of the observed phenotype with the suspected/detected ASD … About 60% of ASD subjects show intellectual disabilities … Phenotypic spectrum associated with …

[4] High-resolution chromosome ideogram representation of currently recognized genes for autism spectrum disorders
    MG Butler, SK Rafi, AM Manzardo (2015)
    PMID:25803107 DOI:10.3390/ijms16036464 https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/16/3/6464
    snippet: … Meaningful correlations of the observed phenotype in … About 60% of ASD subjects show intellectual disabilities at a … DNA markers that co-inherit with the specific phenotype [16,17]. A …
    abstract: Recently, autism-related research has focused on the identification of various genes and disturbed pathways causing the genetically heterogeneous group of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The list of autism-related genes has significantly increased due to better awareness with advances in genetic technology and expanding searchable genomic databases. We compiled a master list of known and clinically relevant autism spectrum disorder genes identified with supporting evidence from peer-reviewed medical literature sources by searching key words related to autism and genetics and from authoritative autism-related public access websites, such as the Simons Foundation Autism Research Institute autism genomic database dedicated to gene discovery and characterization. Our list consists of 792 genes arranged in alphabetical order in tabular form with gene symbols placed on high-resolution human chromosome ideograms, thereby enabling clinical and laboratory geneticists and genetic counsellors to access convenient visual images of the location and distribution of ASD genes. Meaningful correlations of the observed phenotype in patients with suspected/confirmed ASD gene(s) at the chromosome region or breakpoint band site can be made to inform diagnosis and gene-based personalized care and provide genetic counselling for families.

[5] Genetics Of Obesity In Starr County, Texas Mexican Americans
    HM Highland (2015)
    https://digitalcommons.library.tmc.edu/utgsbs_dissertations/557/
    snippet: … For the last 33 years, the Starr County Health Studies has collected an array of phenotypes and biological samples from residents of Starr County, along Texas-Mexico border. This …

[6] A Strong Candidate Gene for Nonsyndromic Intellectual ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39390489/
    snippet: by A Turkyilmaz · 2025 · Cited by 1 — A Strong Candidate Gene for Nonsyndromic Intellectual Disability Phenotype: SGSM3 ... (Arg526Ter)) variation was detected in the SGSM3 gene in two ...
    abstract: SGSM proteins are small modulator proteins interacting with proteins in the RAS signaling pathway. Studies with mouse and human tissues indicated that SGSM genes were highly expressed in the brain and could be expressed at different levels at different stages of development in fetal and adult brain tissue. It was first reported by Birnbaum et al. that the SGSM3 gene might be associated with a Mendelian inherited disease in families of Ashkenazi Jews with clinical manifestations of intellectual disability (ID). In this study, a novel homozygous stop-gain (NM_015705.6: c.1576C>T: p.(Arg526Ter)) variation was detected in the SGSM3 gene in two siblings with short stature and ID findings. The report of two cases with bi-allelic LOF variants in the SGSM3 gene from different populations with similar clinical manifestations strengthens the potential of this gene as a candidate gene for the nonsyndromic ID phenotype. Functional studies are required to investigate the signaling pathways affected by SGSM3 gene variations to produce the ID phenotype and their effect on the functioning of neurons.

[7] Birnbaum-et-al-2023-SGSM3.pdf
    (authors not shown)
    https://doryeshorim.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Birnbaum-et-al-2023-SGSM3.pdf
    snippet: short stature. Family B ... In this paper, we highlight SGSM3 as a candidate disease gene for autosomal recessive mild to moderate intellectual disability.

[8] (PDF) A Strong Candidate Gene for Nonsyndromic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384812407_A_Strong_Candidate_Gene_for_Nonsyndromic_Intellectual_Disability_Phenotype_SGSM3
    snippet: (Arg526Ter)) variation was detected in the SGSM3 gene in two siblings with short stature and ID findings. The report of two cases with bi‐ ...

[9] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://cris.tau.ac.il/en/publications/intellectual-disability-syndrome-associated-with-a-homozygous-fou/
    snippet: Intellectual ... Conclusions An Ashkenazi Jewish homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 was discovered in individuals with NDDs and short stature.
    abstract: Patients with Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (SKDEAS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with a spectrum of developmental and intellectual delays and disabilities, harbor diverse mutations in WDR26, encoding a subunit of the multiprotein CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Structural studies revealed that homodimers of WDR26 bridge two core-CTLH E3 complexes to generate giant, hollow oval-shaped supramolecular CTLH E3 assemblies. Additionally, WDR26 mediates CTLH E3 complex binding to subunit YPEL5 and functions as substrate receptor for the transcriptional repressor HBP1. Here, we mapped SKDEAS-associated mutations on a WDR26 structural model and tested their functionality in complementation studies using genetically engineered human cells lacking CTLH E3 supramolecular assemblies. Despite the diversity of mutations, 15 of 16 tested mutants impaired at least one CTLH E3 complex function contributing to complex assembly and interactions, thus providing first mechanistic insights into SKDEAS pathology.

[10] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37833060/
    snippet: by R Birnbaum · 2024 · Cited by 3 — Intellectual ... Conclusions: An Ashkenazi Jewish homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 was discovered in individuals with NDDs and short stature.
    abstract: Patients with Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (SKDEAS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with a spectrum of developmental and intellectual delays and disabilities, harbor diverse mutations in WDR26, encoding a subunit of the multiprotein CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Structural studies revealed that homodimers of WDR26 bridge two core-CTLH E3 complexes to generate giant, hollow oval-shaped supramolecular CTLH E3 assemblies. Additionally, WDR26 mediates CTLH E3 complex binding to subunit YPEL5 and functions as substrate receptor for the transcriptional repressor HBP1. Here, we mapped SKDEAS-associated mutations on a WDR26 structural model and tested their functionality in complementation studies using genetically engineered human cells lacking CTLH E3 supramolecular assemblies. Despite the diversity of mutations, 15 of 16 tested mutants impaired at least one CTLH E3 complex function contributing to complex assembly and interactions, thus providing first mechanistic insights into SKDEAS pathology.