SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    PMID:38815585 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.05.001 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 encodes a member of the MSL complex, an epigenetic regulator acetylating histone H4. We identify MSL2 … : the MSL2associated neurodevelopmental syndrome (MANDS). …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Homozygous Deletion of the Epigenetic Regulator PHF20 in Individuals With Neurodevelopmental Disorder
    SY Dagan, H Xuan, J Rips, E Paz (2025)
    PMID:41438488 DOI:10.1155/humu/6484814 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/humu/6484814
    snippet: … of PHF20 leads to a neurodevelopmental syndrome, potentially through targeted epigenetic … variants in MSL2 lead to Karayol–Borroto–Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome (…
    abstract: <i>PHF20</i> encodes plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20), a component of the KAT8-containing nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex that deposits acetylation on histone H4 to activate gene expression. We report two unrelated individuals with developmental delay, microcephaly, and distinctive facial features, in whom exome sequencing and chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> that segregated with the disease phenotype in their families. Breakpoint junction sequencing revealed an <i>Alu-Alu</i>-mediated deletion event. Western blot in cells from an affected individual showed undetectable PHF20, while levels of other NSL complex subunits were unaltered. Transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis revealed significant downregulation of gene pathways related to cell projection and neuronal development, associated with reduced histone H4K16 acetylation at these genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> leads to a neurodevelopmental syndrome, potentially through targeted epigenetic dysregulation and altered gene expression essential for neuronal development. Identifying additional families with biallelic <i>PHF20</i> variants will further delineate the phenotypic spectrum, and molecular studies in neuronal cell lines will be essential for understanding the disease mechanism.

[3] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene (OMIM 614802) … neurodevelopmental syndrome of variable severity (Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome, …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[4] The evolving landscape of functional models of autism spectrum disorder
    J Ranjan, A Bhattacharya (2025)
    PMID:40558535 DOI:10.3390/cells14120908 https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4409/14/12/908
    snippet: … MSL2 Biallelic expression of dosage sensitive genes, histone H4 acetylation 3q22.3 Homozygous KO Heterogenous phenotype and perinatal lethality Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1-3% of the population globally. Owing to its multifactorial origin, complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to faithfully model ASD. In essence, ASD is an umbrella term for a group of individually rare disorders, each risk gene accounting for <1% of cases, threaded by a set of overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral tests are considered a gold standard for ASD diagnosis, and several animal models (rodents, pigs, and non-human primates) have traditionally been used to study its molecular basis. These models recapitulate the human phenotype to a varying degree and have been indispensable to preclinical research, but they cannot be used to study human-specific features such as protracted neuronal maturation and cell-intrinsic attributes, posing serious limitations to translatability. Human stem cell-based models, both as monolayer 2D cultures and 3D organoids and assembloids, can circumvent these limitations. Generated from a patient's own reprogrammed cells, these can be used for testing therapeutic interventions that are more condition and patient relevant, targeting developmental windows where the intervention would be most effective. We discuss some of these advancements by comparing traditional and recent models of ASD.

[5] Stage-specific epigenetic priming amplifies gene activation during lineage commitment
    …, W Deboutte, H Holz, M Shvedunova, R Karayol… (2026)
    PMID:41894493 DOI:10.1126/sciadv.adz8889 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.adz8889
    snippet: … consists of MSL1, MSL2, and MSL3, as well as the histone acetyltransferase males absent on the first (MOF, also known as KAT8). De novo mutations in the subunits MSL2 (14) and …
    abstract: Neural progenitor cells exhibit developmental plasticity as they can commit to distinct developmental trajectories. The male-specific lethal complex (MSLc) is linked to multiple developmental disorders, suggesting a role in neural fate commitment. To dissect MSLc function, we used a multipronged approach combining chronic and acute depletion models. Knockout of the MSLc scaffolding component MSL1 caused embryonic lethality by E10.5 (embryonic day 10.5), and single-cell multiomics revealed altered cell population composition across multiple germ layer-derived lineages, including neuroectoderm. Two-dimensional directed differentiation models showed that the MSLc facilitates accessibility at regulatory elements during early stages of neurogenesis. Neurodevelopmental genes displayed reduced enhancer-promoter contacts and failed to reach appropriate expression levels when the MSLc was absent early in neural differentiation. In contrast, MSLc loss at later stages did not recapitulate this phenotype, indicating that MSLc-mediated gene priming is a key mechanism enabling timely activation of lineage-specifying transcriptional programs.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38815585 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.05.001 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38815585/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of ... Remzi Karayol , Maria Carla Borroto , Sadegheh Haghshenas ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: ... MSL2 gene in 25 unrelated patients with Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome. The mutation was shown to be de novo in 23 ...

[8] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38815585 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.05.001 https://pure.johnshopkins.edu/en/publications/msl2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-with-lack-of-/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of ... Cite this. APA; Standard; Harvard; Vancouver; Author; BIBTEX; RIS. Karayol ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[9] Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://thegencc.org/submissions/SGC-177127.1
    snippet: ... MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders. 38815585, Karayol R et al. 2024, MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929724001642
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — We tentatively suggest a name for this phenotype: the MSL2-associated neurodevelopmental syndrome (MANDS). ... Karayol, J. Seyfferth, J.A. ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.