SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells
    M Okubo, M Ogawa, N Eura, YU Inoue, K Dewa, T Owa… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/3/1007/8483316
    snippet: … variants exhibited cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy … SNUPN variants to muscular dystrophy, our findings provide neuronal-specific phenotypes that broaden the spectrum of SNUPN…
    abstract: Mutations in the SNUPN gene, which encodes snurportin-1, a nuclear import adaptor for U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP), have recently been implicated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, attributed to disrupted pre-messenger RNA splicing in skeletal muscle. U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins play a vital role in pre-messenger RNA splicing, a process essential for transcript fidelity and the regulation of gene expression across tissues. However, the impact of SNUPN mutations on the CNS remains unclear. We identified pathogenic variants in the SNUPN gene in two families with spinocerebellar atrophy. One patient exhibited mild changes in skeletal muscle, while the other did not. To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms, nuclear transport of the mutated snurpotin-1, and its interaction with importin beta were analysed in vitro. Then, we generated a knock-in mouse carrying the patients' variants and assessed its motor function and cerebellar morphology in vivo. Furthermore, we analysed U1 snRNP localization and RNA splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells by both RNA- and single-cell RNA sequencing. Mutated snurportin-1 displayed impaired nuclear transport and reduced binding to importin beta. The knock-in mouse mimicking the compound heterozygous variants exhibited cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy and dendritic abnormalities in Purkinje cells. Abnormal RNA splicing and reduced expression were observed in many genes related to neuronal development and synaptic organization in Purkinje cells, leading to an immature cytoskeleton and reduced secretion of sonic hedgehog. The defects in Purkinje cells caused secondary abnormalities in granule cell migration and interneuron development. Our findings suggest that snurportin-1 plays a critical role in cerebellar development through U1 snRNP-mediated RNA processing and that its dysfunction may contribute to spinocerebellar ataxia. These results expand the clinical spectrum of SNUPN-related disorders beyond skeletal muscle and highlight splicing dysregulation as a potential mechanism underlying cerebellar atrophy.

[2] Genetic SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in Purkinje cells
    M Okubo, M Ogawa, N Eura, YU Inoue, K Dewa, T Owa… (2024)
    DOI:10.1101/2024.07.11.24310169.abstract https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.07.11.24310169.abstract
    snippet: … the patients harboring the SNUPN variants is limb girdle muscular dystrophy, even though … girdle muscular dystrophy and SCA are allelic disorders caused by biallelic SNUPN variants. …

[3] The 2025 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2025)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(24)01757-7/abstract
    snippet: … Muscular dystrophy with cardiomyopathy and triangular tongue (Formerly LGMD2W) 1.55 AR MDRCMTT (LGMD2W) 616827 2q14.3 LIMS2 (= PINCH2) 607908 LIM and senescent cell …

[4] The 2026 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2026)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(25)01030-2/abstract
    snippet: … Muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy (congenital with or without impaired intellectual … Congenital muscular dystrophy with fatty liver and infantile-onset cataract caused by …

[5] Molecular genetic studies of recessively inherited eye disease
    S Joyce (2011)
    https://etheses.bham.ac.uk/id/eprint/3199/
    snippet: … Sequence alignment of Gly137Asp in SNUPN across species highlighted in red. (For C. … in identifying rare translocations in Duchene Muscular Dystrophy (Worton and Thompson, 1988)…
    abstract: Cataract is the opacification of the crystalline lens of the eye. Both childhood and later-onset cataracts have been linked with complex genetic factors. Cataracts vary in phenotype and exhibit genetic heterogeneity. They can appear as isolated abnormalities, or as part of a syndrome. During this project, analysis of syndromic and non-syndromic cataract families using genetic linkage studies was undertaken in order to identify the genes involved, using an autozygosity mapping and positional candidate approach. Causative mutations were identified in families with syndromes involving cataracts. The finding of a mutation in CYP27A1 in a family with Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis permitted clinical intervention as this is a treatable disorder. A mutation that segregated with disease status in a family with Marinesco Sjogren Syndrome was identified in SIL1. In a family with Knobloch Syndrome, a frameshift mutation in COL18A1 was detected. Analysis of families with non-syndromic autosomal recessive cataracts was also performed, identifying homozygous candidate regions, and sequencing candidate genes within these regions. The identification of a potential putative mutation in one family in CDC25A illustrated the ... (continues)

[6] SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41705730/
    snippet: SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells · Authors · Affiliations.
    abstract: Mutations in the SNUPN gene, which encodes snurportin-1, a nuclear import adaptor for U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP), have recently been implicated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, attributed to disrupted pre-messenger RNA splicing in skeletal muscle. U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins play a vital role in pre-messenger RNA splicing, a process essential for transcript fidelity and the regulation of gene expression across tissues. However, the impact of SNUPN mutations on the CNS remains unclear. We identified pathogenic variants in the SNUPN gene in two families with spinocerebellar atrophy. One patient exhibited mild changes in skeletal muscle, while the other did not. To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms, nuclear transport of the mutated snurpotin-1, and its interaction with importin beta were analysed in vitro. Then, we generated a knock-in mouse carrying the patients' variants and assessed its motor function and cerebellar morphology in vivo. Furthermore, we analysed U1 snRNP localization and RNA splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells by both RNA- and single-cell RNA sequencing. Mutated snurportin-1 displayed impaired nuclear transport and reduced binding to importin beta. The knock-in mouse mimicking the compound heterozygous variants exhibited cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy and dendritic abnormalities in Purkinje cells. Abnormal RNA splicing and reduced expression were observed in many genes related to neuronal development and synaptic organization in Purkinje cells, leading to an immature cytoskeleton and reduced secretion of sonic hedgehog. The defects in Purkinje cells caused secondary abnormalities in granule cell migration and interneuron development. Our findings suggest that snurportin-1 plays a critical role in cerebellar development through U1 snRNP-mediated RNA processing and that its dysfunction may contribute to spinocerebellar ataxia. These results expand the clinical spectrum of SNUPN-related disorders beyond skeletal muscle and highlight splicing dysregulation as a potential mechanism underlying cerebellar atrophy.

[7] Genetic SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2024.07.11.24310169v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.07.11.24310169v1.full-text
    snippet: We conclude that both limb girdle muscular dystrophy and SCA are allelic disorders caused by biallelic SNUPN variants. ... cerebellar ataxia ...

[8] Identification of 18 patients diagnosed with muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Identification-of-18-patients-diagnosed-with-muscular-dystrophy-carrying-biallelic-SNUPN_fig1_378521366
    snippet: Biallelic variants in the SNUPN gene were recently shown to cause a new form of muscular dystrophy varying from a congenital to a childhood-onset limb girdle ...

[9] Search results for SNUPN
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/search/results?q=SNUPN
    snippet: 83 diseases matching SNUPN ; 6, MSC005, Muscular Dystrophy ; 7, ATS308, Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxia ...

[10] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. … childhood- onset limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMDR29, … spinocerebellar ataxia, mild intellectual disability and muscle …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.