SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL3) … a methylation variant pathogenicity (MVP) score for each individual, ranging from 0 to 1, with a higher score indicating greater similarity to the MSL2-related disorder episignature…
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Evaluation of DNA methylation episignatures for diagnosis and phenotype correlations in 42 Mendelian neurodevelopmental disorders
    E Aref (2020)
    PMID:34087165 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.04.022 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30019-7
    snippet: … published syndromes with DNA methylation episignatures and, most … assessment in individuals affected by these disorders. … of 34 episignatures, we demonstrate that the classification of …

[3] Clinical epigenomics: genome-wide DNA methylation analysis for the diagnosis of Mendelian disorders
    B Sadikovic, MA Levy, J Kerkhof, E Aref (2021)
    PMID:33637969 DOI:10.1038/s41436-021-01130-z https://www.nature.com/articles/s41436-020-01096-4
    snippet: … of rare disorders exhibit DNA methylation “episignatures” or “… in patients with Mendelian neurodevelopmental disorders. … , can classify samples using the 43 episignatures in EpiSign v2. …

[4] Identification of DNA Methylation Episignatures for Classification and Phenotype/Genotype Correlation in Mendelian Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    J Reilly (2022)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/4d490a4ccf210a521542a90c7adc68e6/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … into the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders. I hypothesized DNA methylation can provide classifications of neurodevelopmental disorders, and identify epigenetic …

[5] Clinical utility of DNA-methylation signatures in routine diagnostics for neurodevelopmental disorders
    DJ Smits, C Debuy, AS Brooks, R Schot… (2025)
    PMID:40730689 DOI:10.1038/s41431-025-01919-5 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-025-01919-5
    snippet: … as a diagnostic tool to identify disease causes and classify variants of uncertain … DNA methylation episignatures expand and refine the epigenetic landscapes of Mendelian disorders…
    abstract: Disease-causing variants in chromatin regulator genes cause many developmental disorders. DNA methylation (DNAm) signatures are emerging as a diagnostic tool to identify disease causes and classify variants of uncertain significance (VUS). This study evaluates their diagnostic utility in a routine clinical setting. We retrospectively analyzed 298 patients from the Erasmus MC who underwent DNAm signature testing using the commercial Episign<sup>TM</sup> platform between February 2019 and June 2023. The cohort included 75 targeted analyses for follow-up on prior genetic findings and 223 complete analyses for cases unsolved after prior diagnostic testing. In the 75 targeted analyses, DNAm signatures were positive in 18% (10/55) for (VUS), 91% (10/11) for likely pathogenic variants, and 89% (8/9) for pathogenic variants. In 223 complete analyses, a disease-linked DNAm signature was observed in 9.0% (20/223), with a (partial) phenotypic match in 55% of those (11/20) but no match in 45% (9/20). In 81.8% (9/11) of those DNAm signature positive cases with a phenotypic match, retrospective analysis identified a causative DNA variant or confirmed independently an imprinting disorder that was unidentified previously, providing valuable diagnostic insights with an overall diagnostic yield of 4.0% (9/223) for these molecular confirmed cases. In conclusion, this study supports the clinical utility of DNAm signatures to assist in interpreting and classifying VUS, but also as a complementary tool when prior genetic testing, including exome sequencing, failed to provide a diagnosis.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues. ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] Understanding the Impact of MSL2 Variants on ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://tinyeye.com/blog/understanding-the-impact-of-msl2-variants-on-neurodevelopmental-disorders-a-guide-for-practitioners.php
    snippet: Improved Diagnosis: The identification of a distinct episignature associated with MSL2 variants enables more accurate diagnosis of related NDDs. Practitioners ...

[8] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/MSL2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-Karayol-Borroto/3003d40e10d363a05c4c8608a401917b44a1b045
    snippet: An MSL2-related disorder is defined as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[9] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380990091_MSL2_variants_lead_to_a_neurodevelopmental_syndrome_with_lack_of_coordination_epilepsy_specific_dysmorphisms_and_a_distinct_episignature
    snippet: Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[10] MSL2 gene MSL Complex Subunit 2
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/MSL2
    snippet: Clinically, these findings place MSL2 among genes with neurodevelopmental relevance, with variant evidence supporting a role in human developmental disease.