SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Mutations in NKX6-2 cause progressive spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, N Patel, J Vandrovcova, MN Zanetti… (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30196-9
    snippet: … hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 … the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination. …
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[2] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6‐2‐related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, M Alsagob, K Kloth… (2020)
    DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ene.14082
    snippet: … of NKX6-2 mutations from diffuse hypomyelination to focal T2… paraplegia to spastic ataxia without overt hypomyelination to … in NKX6-2 with cases presenting clinically with spastic ataxia …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[3] NKX6-2-related disorder
    V Chelban, N Kaya, F Alkuraya, H Houlden (2018)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk531509/
    snippet: … diffuse central nervous system hypomyelination. At the severe … by slowly progressive complex spastic ataxia with pyramidal … signal suggestive of hypomyelination observed in areas …

[4] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy–NKX6–2 gene variant as a cause
    P Guder, U Löbel, B Fiebig, I Oppermann, A Berger… (2021)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666459321000056
    snippet: … in NKX6–2 have previously been reported to be associated with defined SPAX8 [1,8]. Chelban … and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2-related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination …

[5] Expanding the clinical and neuroimaging features of NKX6-2-related hereditary spastic ataxia type 8
    AH Bereshneh, S Hosseipour… (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S176972121930744X
    snippet: … Chelban et al., 2017; Dorboz et al., 2017; Anazi et al., 2017). Here in we present two additional cases of hereditary spastic Ataxia type 8 due to a novel NKX6-2 … diffuse hypomyelination, …
    abstract: Pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 gene causing autosomal recessive spastic ataxia type 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy have been reported in few families around the world. In this study, we performed Whole Exome Sequencing and identified a novel missense variant, c.501C > G; p.(Phe167Leu), in two affected siblings with main manifestations of global developmental delay, motor regression, hypotonia, clonus in lower limbs and muscle bulk atrophy especially in the upper limbs, spasticity and contracture, scoliosis, hip dislocation, oculomotor apraxia, horizontal and vertical nystagmus. In addition, wrist and foot drop due to peripheral axonal neuropathy were observed in these patients as a new clinical finding and cerebellar white matter involvement in brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) as new imaging finding. Therefore, we expanded the manifestations of NKX6-2-related disorders in this manuscript.

[6] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2 ... - PubMed
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31509304/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2020 · Cited by 34 — Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2-related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination ... Authors. V Chelban , M Alsagob , K Kloth , A ...
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[7] Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:28575651 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.009 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929717301969
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 66 — Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia and Hypomyelination. Author links open overlay panelViorica Chelban , Nisha Patel 2 ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[8] NKX6-2-Related Disorder - GeneReviews® - NCBI Bookshelf
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK531509/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2018 · Cited by 10 — Viorica Chelban, MD, Namik Kaya, PhD, Fowzan Alkuraya, MD ... Mutations in NKX6-2 cause progressive spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>NKX6-2-related disorder is characterized by a spectrum of progressive neurologic manifestations resulting from diffuse central nervous system hypomyelination. At the severe end of the spectrum is neonatal-onset nystagmus, severe spastic tetraplegia with joint contractures and scoliosis, and visual and hearing impairment, all of which rapidly progress resulting in death in early childhood. At the milder end of the spectrum is normal achievement of early motor milestones in the first year of life followed by slowly progressive complex spastic ataxia with pyramidal findings (spasticity with increased muscle tone and difficulty with gait and fine motor coordination) and cerebellar findings (nystagmus, extraocular movement disorder, dysarthria, titubation, and ataxia) with loss of developmental milestones. To date NKX6-2-related disorder has been reported in 25 individuals from 13 families.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of NKX6-2-related disorder is established in a proband with typical clinical and neuroimaging findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and typically involves a multidisciplinary team of specialists in the areas of developmental pediatrics, neurology, pediatric rehabilitation, orthopedics, PT/OT, social work, nutrition, pulmonary/sleep medicine, ophthalmology, audiology, and palliative care. Surveillance: Sleep studies for evidence of apnea. Routine assessment of: nutritional status and safety of oral intake; development; progression of spasticity and contractures.<h4>Genetic counseling</h4>NKX6-2-related disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the NKX6-2 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

[9] Submission Details
    (authors not shown)
    https://thegencc.org/submissions/SGC-111405.1
    snippet: Chelban V et al. 2017, Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia and Hypomyelination. 28940097, Anazi S et al. 2017, Expanding the genetic ...

[10] Expanding the clinical and genetic spectra of NKX6‐2‐related disorder
    C Baldi, AM Bertoli‐Avella, N Al‐Sannaa… (2018)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.13221 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13221
    snippet: … Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) affect the white … variants with a minor allele frequency < 10% were compiled … affecteds for which clinically prominent ataxia and cerebellar …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) affect the white matter of the central nervous system and manifest as neurological disorders. They are genetically heterogeneous. Very recently, biallelic variants in NKX6-2 have been suggested to cause a novel form of autosomal recessive HLD. Using whole-exome or whole-genome sequencing, we identified the previously reported c.196delC and c.487C>G variants in NKX6-2 in 3 and 2 unrelated index cases, respectively; the novel c.608G>A variant was identified in a sixth patient. All variants were homozygous in affected family members only. Our patients share a primary diagnosis of psychomotor delay, and they show spastic quadriparesis, nystagmus and hypotonia. Seizures and dysmorphic features (observed in 2 families each) represent an addition to the phenotype, while developmental regression (observed in 3 families) appears to be a notable and previously underestimated clinical feature. Our findings extend the clinical and mutational spectra associated with this novel form of HLD. Comparative analysis of our 10 patients and the 15 reported previously did, however, not reveal clear evidence for a genotype-phenotype correlation.