SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic diagnosis of patients with neurodevelopmental disorders using array-CGH and whole exome sequencing
    E Riberi (2019)
    https://iris.unito.it/bitstream/2318/2109026/2/Tesi%20PhD%20Evelise%20Riberi%208.pdf
    snippet: … eyebrows, full nasal tip, cupid’s bow in the upper lip, full lower lip, prominent chin (Fig. 15). … far only LoF have been reported, causing Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (MIM# 617516). This …

[2] De Novo Variants in the F-Box Protein FBXO11 in 20 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929718302301
    snippet: by A Gregor · 2018 · Cited by 59 — ... nasal tip, smooth, short philtrum, thin upper lip, pointed chin ... PSMD12 (MIM: 604450 ) (causing Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome [MIM ...
    abstract: Next-generation sequencing combined with international data sharing has enormously facilitated identification of new disease-associated genes and mutations. This is particularly true for genetically extremely heterogeneous entities such as neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Through exome sequencing and world-wide collaborations, we identified and assembled 20 individuals with de novo variants in FBXO11. They present with mild to severe developmental delay associated with a range of features including short (4/20) or tall (2/20) stature, obesity (5/20), microcephaly (4/19) or macrocephaly (2/19), behavioral problems (17/20), seizures (5/20), cleft lip or palate or bifid uvula (3/20), and minor skeletal anomalies. FBXO11 encodes a member of the F-Box protein family, constituting a subunit of an E3-ubiquitin ligase complex. This complex is involved in ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and thus in controlling critical biological processes by regulating protein turnover. The identified de novo aberrations comprise two large deletions, ten likely gene disrupting variants, and eight missense variants distributed throughout FBXO11. Structural modeling for missense variants located in the CASH or the Zinc-finger UBR domains suggests destabilization of the protein. This, in combination with the observed spectrum and localization of identified variants and the lack of apparent genotype-phenotype correlations, is compatible with loss of function or haploinsufficiency as an underlying mechanism. We implicate de novo missense and likely gene disrupting variants in FBXO11 in a neurodevelopmental disorder with variable intellectual disability and various other features.

[3] De Novo Variants in the F-Box Protein FBXO11 in 20 ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC6080769 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6080769/
    snippet: by A Gregor · 2018 · Cited by 59 — ... nasal tip, smooth, short philtrum, thin upper lip, pointed chin ... PSMD12 (MIM: 604450) (causing Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome [MIM ...
    abstract: Next-generation sequencing combined with international data sharing has enormously facilitated identification of new disease-associated genes and mutations. This is particularly true for genetically extremely heterogeneous entities such as neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Through exome sequencing and world-wide collaborations, we identified and assembled 20 individuals with de novo variants in FBXO11. They present with mild to severe developmental delay associated with a range of features including short (4/20) or tall (2/20) stature, obesity (5/20), microcephaly (4/19) or macrocephaly (2/19), behavioral problems (17/20), seizures (5/20), cleft lip or palate or bifid uvula (3/20), and minor skeletal anomalies. FBXO11 encodes a member of the F-Box protein family, constituting a subunit of an E3-ubiquitin ligase complex. This complex is involved in ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and thus in controlling critical biological processes by regulating protein turnover. The identified de novo aberrations comprise two large deletions, ten likely gene disrupting variants, and eight missense variants distributed throughout FBXO11. Structural modeling for missense variants located in the CASH or the Zinc-finger UBR domains suggests destabilization of the protein. This, in combination with the observed spectrum and localization of identified variants and the lack of apparent genotype-phenotype correlations, is compatible with loss of function or haploinsufficiency as an underlying mechanism. We implicate de novo missense and likely gene disrupting variants in FBXO11 in a neurodevelopmental disorder with variable intellectual disability and various other features.

[4] De novo disruption of the proteasome regulatory subunit PSMD12 causes a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder
    …, C Golzio, S Bézieau, P Stankiewicz, B Isidor (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30003-4
    snippet: … Finally, to assess the role of psmd12 in craniofacial development, we therefore injected … niscent of the phenotypes observed in our subject cohort. The high expression of PSMD12 in the …

[5] Does It Run in Your Family? Inherited Truncating  PSMD12  Variants Broaden the Phenotypic Spectrum of Stankiewicz‐Isidor Syndrome
    A Feresin, B Spedicati, S Zampieri… (2025)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63953 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63953
    snippet: … StankiewiczIsidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms… Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic …
    abstract: Alteration in the ubiquitin-proteasome system results in human disorders with neurological and/or autoinflammatory presentation. Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms, with or without other congenital anomalies, and autoinflammation. We described six patients (four adults) from two unrelated families carrying a known p.(Arg289*) or a novel p.(Tyr111*) PSMD12 variant. Portraying a completely penetrant condition with inter- and intra-familiar clinical variability, all individuals presented with developmental delay, intellectual disability, craniofacial, and skeletal anomalies. Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic fingernail, cholesteatoma, oligodontia, and the occurrence of an ovarian teratoma. Most subjects had acne, short stature, and developed obesity since late childhood. Eating behavior was reported. Good sociality and behavioral concern emerged as well. None presented clinical manifestations of autoinflammation and the detected IFN-I signature perturbations were not specific. Together with a complete literature review, we expanded the clinical spectrum of STISS, highlighting the relevance of inherited variants, and discussing challenges in diagnosis and management. We finally consider the intriguing role of PSMD12 in human development and propose to index "onychoheterotopia" among the Human Phenotype Ontology terms.

[6] Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome: expanding the clinical and molecular phenotype
    …, S Bézieau, E Krüger, S Küry, PƗ Stankiewicz (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360021041320
    snippet: … PSMD12 haploinsufficiency was likely the pathogenic molecular mechanism causing the disorder… Cardiac malformations were present in about 40% (10/24) of our cohort. Most frequent …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12 has been reported in individuals with neurodevelopmental phenotypes, including developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), facial dysmorphism, and congenital malformations, defined as Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS). Investigations showed that pathogenic variants in PSMD12 perturb intracellular protein homeostasis. Our objective was to further explore the clinical and molecular phenotypic spectrum of STISS.<h4>Methods</h4>We report 24 additional unrelated patients with STISS with various truncating single nucleotide variants or copy-number variant deletions involving PSMD12. We explore disease etiology by assessing patient cells and CRISPR/Cas9-engineered cell clones for various cellular pathways and inflammatory status.<h4>Results</h4>The expressivity of most clinical features in STISS is highly variable. In addition to previously reported DD/ID, speech delay, cardiac and renal anomalies, we also confirmed preaxial hand abnormalities as a feature of this syndrome. Of note, 2 patients also showed chilblains resembling signs observed in interferonopathy. Remarkably, our data show that STISS patient cells exhibit a profound remodeling of the mTORC1 and mitophagy pathways with an induction of type I interferon-stimulated genes.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We refine the phenotype of STISS and show that it can be clinically recognizable and biochemically diagnosed by a type I interferon gene signature.

[7] Proteolysis by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a tightly regulated biological process in eukaryotic cells and is crucial for their homeostasis, signaling …
    …, P Stankiewicz, B Isidor (2017)
    http://eichlerlab.gs.washington.edu/eichler/pdfs/Kury_AJHG_2017.pdf
    snippet: … case series involve PSMD12, which encodes PSMD12 (aka RPN5), one … Finally, to assess the role of psmd12 in craniofacial … of the phenotypes observed in our subject cohort. The high …

[8] Haploinsufficiency of the chromatin remodeler BPTF causes syndromic developmental and speech delay, postnatal microcephaly, and dysmorphic features
    P Stankiewicz, TN Khan, P Szafranski, L Slattery… (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30336-1
    snippet: … in our cohort and to assess the role of BPTF in craniofacial patterning, we … the clinical phenotype of 17q24.2 microdeletion is associated with haploinsufficiency of the affected PSMD12 …
    abstract: Bromodomain PHD finger transcription factor (BPTF) is the largest subunit of nucleosome remodeling factor (NURF), a member of the ISWI chromatin-remodeling complex. However, the clinical consequences of disruption of this complex remain largely uncharacterized. BPTF is required for anterior-posterior axis formation of the mouse embryo and was shown to promote posterior neuroectodermal fate by enhancing Smad2-activated wnt8 expression in zebrafish. Here, we report eight loss-of-function and two missense variants (eight de novo and two of unknown origin) in BPTF on 17q24.2. The BPTF variants were found in unrelated individuals aged between 2.1 and 13 years, who manifest variable degrees of developmental delay/intellectual disability (10/10), speech delay (10/10), postnatal microcephaly (7/9), and dysmorphic features (9/10). Using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing of bptf in zebrafish to induce a loss of gene function, we observed a significant reduction in head size of F0 mutants compared to control larvae. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) and phospho-histone H3 (PH3) staining to assess apoptosis and cell proliferation, respectively, showed a significant increase in cell death in F0 mutants compared to controls. Additionally, we observed a substantial increase of the ceratohyal angle of the craniofacial skeleton in bptf F0 mutants, indicating abnormal craniofacial patterning. Taken together, our data demonstrate the pathogenic role of BPTF haploinsufficiency in syndromic neurodevelopmental anomalies and extend the clinical spectrum of human disorders caused by ablation of chromatin remodeling complexes.

[9] Does It Run in Your Family? Inherited Truncating PSMD12 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39641441/
    snippet: by A Feresin · 2025 · Cited by 2 — Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), ...
    abstract: Alteration in the ubiquitin-proteasome system results in human disorders with neurological and/or autoinflammatory presentation. Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms, with or without other congenital anomalies, and autoinflammation. We described six patients (four adults) from two unrelated families carrying a known p.(Arg289*) or a novel p.(Tyr111*) PSMD12 variant. Portraying a completely penetrant condition with inter- and intra-familiar clinical variability, all individuals presented with developmental delay, intellectual disability, craniofacial, and skeletal anomalies. Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic fingernail, cholesteatoma, oligodontia, and the occurrence of an ovarian teratoma. Most subjects had acne, short stature, and developed obesity since late childhood. Eating behavior was reported. Good sociality and behavioral concern emerged as well. None presented clinical manifestations of autoinflammation and the detected IFN-I signature perturbations were not specific. Together with a complete literature review, we expanded the clinical spectrum of STISS, highlighting the relevance of inherited variants, and discussing challenges in diagnosis and management. We finally consider the intriguing role of PSMD12 in human development and propose to index "onychoheterotopia" among the Human Phenotype Ontology terms.

[10] Stankiewicz-Isidor Syndrome (STISS)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/stankiewicz_isidor_syndrome
    snippet: A neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, behavioral disorders, mild dysmorphism, ophthalmologic ...