SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Epigenetic mistakes in neurodevelopmental disorders
    G Mastrototaro, M Zaghi, A Sessa (2017)
    PMID:28255957 DOI:10.1007/s12031-017-0900-6 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12031-017-0900-6
    snippet: … Several members of this complex are linked to Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) (mild to severe ID or delayed development of speech, hypoplasia of the tips of the fingers) (Tsurusaki et al. …
    abstract: Epigenetics is the array of the chromatin modifications that customize in cell-, stage-, or condition-specific manner the information encloses in plain DNA molecules. Increasing evidences suggest the importance of epigenetic mechanisms for development and maintenance of central nervous system. In fact, a large number of newly discovered genetic causes of neurodevelopmental disorders such as intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and many other syndromes are mutations within genes encoding for chromatin remodeling enzymes. Here, we review recent findings on the epigenetic origin of human diseases, with emphasis on disorders that affect development of the nervous system, and discuss novel therapeutic avenues that target epigenetic mechanisms.

[2] Recent advances in understanding neurodevelopmental outcomes in congenital heart disease
    A Ziegler, WK Chung (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959437X22000478
    snippet: … ABL1 Skeletal malformations … TBX3 Skeletal malformations … Autosomal dominant Intellectual developmental disorder with nasal speech, dysmorphic facies, and variable skeletal …

[3] Recent advances in epilepsy genomics and genetic testing
    M Hebbar, HC Mefford (2020)
    PMC7076331 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7076331/
    snippet: … Mega-corpus-callosum syndrome with cerebellar hypoplasia and cortical malformations … KDM6B Neurodevelopmental disorder with coarse facies and mild distal skeletal abnormalities …
    abstract: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a group of severe, early onset epilepsies characterized by refractory seizures, developmental delay or regression associated with ongoing epileptic activity, and generally poor prognosis. DEE is genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous, and there is a plethora of genetic testing options to investigate the rapidly growing list of epilepsy genes. However, more than 50% of patients with DEE remain without a genetic diagnosis despite state-of-the-art genetic testing. In this review, we discuss the major advances in epilepsy genomics that have surfaced in recent years. The goal of this review is to reach a larger audience and build a better understanding of pathogenesis and genetic testing options in DEE.

[4] Epigenetic regulation of craniofacial development and disease
    LC Shull, KB Artinger (2024)
    PMID:37964651 DOI:10.1002/bdr2.2271 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bdr2.2271
    snippet: Background The formation of the craniofacial complex relies on proper neural crest development. The gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and signaling pathways orchestrating this …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>The formation of the craniofacial complex relies on proper neural crest development. The gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and signaling pathways orchestrating this process have been extensively studied. These GRNs and signaling cascades are tightly regulated as alterations to any stage of neural crest development can lead to common congenital birth defects, including multiple syndromes affecting facial morphology as well as nonsyndromic facial defects, such as cleft lip with or without cleft palate. Epigenetic factors add a hierarchy to the regulation of transcriptional networks and influence the spatiotemporal activation or repression of specific gene regulatory cascades; however less is known about their exact mechanisms in controlling precise gene regulation.<h4>Aims</h4>In this review, we discuss the role of epigenetic factors during neural crest development, specifically during craniofacial development and how compromised activities of these regulators contribute to congenital defects that affect the craniofacial complex.

[5] Molecular and clinical aspects of histone-related disorders
    M Al Ojaimi, BJ Banimortada, A Alragheb, RS Hajir… (2025)
    DOI:10.1186/s40246-025-00734-9 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s40246-025-00734-9
    snippet: Epigenetics is the coordination of gene expression without alterations in the DNA sequence. Epigenetic gene expression is regulated by an intricate system that revolves around the …
    abstract: Epigenetics is the coordination of gene expression without alterations in the DNA sequence. Epigenetic gene expression is regulated by an intricate system that revolves around the interaction of histone proteins and DNA within the chromatin structure. Histones remain at the core of the epigenetic gene transcription regulation where histone proteins, along with the histone modification enzymes, and the subunits of chromatin remodelers and epigenetic readers play essential roles in regulating gene expression. Histone-related disorders encompass the syndromes induced by pathogenic variants in genes encoding histones, genes encoding histone modification enzymes, and genes encoding subunits of chromatin remodeler and epigenetic reader complexes. Defects in genes encoding histones lead to the expression of abnormal histone proteins. Abnormalities in genes encoding histone modification enzymes result in aberrant histone modifications. Defects in genes encoding subunits of the chromatin remodeler complexes result in defective chromatin remodeling. Defects in genes that code for the epigenetic readers (bromodomain proteins) will hinder their ability to regulate gene transcription. These disorders typically present manifestations that impact the nervous system which is particularly sensitive due to its need for specific patterns of gene expression for neural cell function and differentiation. To date, 72 histone-related disorders have been described including 7 syndromes due to defects in histone genes, 35 syndromes due to histone modifications defects, 26 syndromes due to defects in chromatin remodeling, and 4 due to defects in epigenetic readers. In this review article, the molecular basis of histone structure and function is first explained, followed by a summary of the histone-related syndromes.

[6] Genetic variants in the KDM6B gene are associated with neurodevelopmental delays and dysmorphic features
    ES Stolerman, E Francisco, JL Stallworth… (2019)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.61173 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.61173
    snippet: … that the KDM6B gene was associated with a syndromic disorder; … There was a large chest with hypoplastic nipples, and … (r) Patient 9 with flexion contractures of the distal phalanges. (s) …
    abstract: Lysine-specific demethylase 6B (KDM6B) demethylates trimethylated lysine-27 on histone H3. The methylation and demethylation of histone proteins affects gene expression during development. Pathogenic alterations in histone lysine methylation and demethylation genes have been associated with multiple neurodevelopmental disorders. We have identified a number of de novo alterations in the KDM6B gene via whole exome sequencing (WES) in a cohort of 12 unrelated patients with developmental delay, intellectual disability, dysmorphic facial features, and other clinical findings. Our findings will allow for further investigation in to the role of the KDM6B gene in human neurodevelopmental disorders.

[7] Stolerman Neurodevelopmental Syndrome (NEDSST)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/stolerman_neurodevelopmental_syndrome
    snippet: Stolerman neurodevelopmental syndrome (NEDSST) is a highly variable neurodevelopmental disorder caused by heterozygous mutation in KDM6B on chromosome 17p13 ...

[8] Nail dysplasia and digital hypoplasia ‒ Coffin-Siris syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38876964 DOI:10.1016/j.abd.2022.11.010 PMC11342972 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11342972/
    snippet: by A Navarro-Bielsa · 2024 · Cited by 4 — Radiography of the hands and feet revealed hypoplasia of the distal phalanges of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th fingers of both hands, absent distal ...

[9] KDM6B
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.simonssearchlight.org/research/what-we-study/kdm6b/
    snippet: KDM6B-related neurodevelopmental disorder happens when there are changes to the KDM6B gene. These changes can keep the gene from working as it should.

[10] STOLERMAN NEURODEVELOPMENTAL SYNDROME; ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/clinicalSynopsis/618505
    snippet: STOLERMAN NEURODEVELOPMENTAL SYNDROME; NEDSST ; GROWTH. Height. - Tall stature (uncommon) ; HEAD & NECK. Head. - Macrocephaly (in some patients) ; CARDIOVASCULAR.