SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] De novo missense variants in FBXO11 alter its protein expression and subcellular localization
    A Gregor, T Meerbrei, T Gerstner… (2022)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/31/3/440/6367979
    snippet: … with short stature and microcephaly being more common than tall stature and macrocephaly. Other … Head circumference was also in the normal range for the majority of cases, with three …
    abstract: Recently, others and we identified de novo FBXO11 (F-Box only protein 11) variants as causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD). We now assembled clinical and mutational information on 23 additional individuals. The phenotypic spectrum remains highly variable, with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability as the core feature and behavioral anomalies, hypotonia and various facial dysmorphism as frequent aspects. The mutational spectrum includes intragenic deletions, likely gene disrupting and missense variants distributed across the protein. To further characterize the functional consequences of FBXO11 missense variants, we analyzed their effects on protein expression and localization by overexpression of 17 different mutant constructs in HEK293 and HeLa cells. We found that the majority of missense variants resulted in subcellular mislocalization and/or reduced FBXO11 protein expression levels. For instance, variants located in the nuclear localization signal and the N-terminal F-Box domain lead to altered subcellular localization with exclusion from the nucleus or the formation of cytoplasmic aggregates and to reduced protein levels in western blot. In contrast, variants localized in the C-terminal Zn-finger UBR domain lead to an accumulation in the cytoplasm without alteration of protein levels. Together with the mutational data, our functional results suggest that most missense variants likely lead to a loss of the original FBXO11 function and thereby highlight haploinsufficiency as the most likely disease mechanism for FBXO11-associated NDDs.

[2] Somatic development disorders in children and adolescents affected by syndromes and diseases associated with neurodysfunction and hydrocephalus …
    L Perenc, A Guzik, J Podgórska (2022)
    https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/19/9/5712
    snippet: … height and weight, head circumference, body mass index, head circumference index), or if … microcephaly, or macrocephaly in the case of de novo variants in the mutation of the FBXO11 …
    abstract: Background: This study was conducted to evaluate the co-occurrence of hydrocephalus treated/untreated surgically and congenital nervous system disorders or neurological syndromes with symptoms visible since childhood, and with somatic development disorders, based on significant data obtained during admission to a neurological rehabilitation unit for children and adolescents. Methods: The study applied a retrospective analysis of data collected during hospitalization of 327 children and adolescents, aged 4−18 years, all presenting congenital disorders of the nervous system and/or neurological syndromes associated with at least one neurodysfunction that existed from early childhood. To allow the identification of individuals with somatic development disorders in the group of children and adolescents with hydrocephalus treated/untreated surgically, the adopted criteria considered the z-score values for body height, body weight, head circumference, body mass index, and head circumference index. Results: Treated/untreated hydrocephalus was observed in the study group at the rates of 8% and 0.9%, respectively. Among 239 patients with cerebral palsy, 9 (3.8%) had surgically treated hydrocephalus, 17 (70.8%) of 24 patients with neural tube defects also had hydrocephalus treated with surgery, and 3 (12.5%) of 24 patients with neural tube defects had untreated hydrocephalus. This medical condition was a more frequent comorbidity in subjects with neural tube defects compared with those with cerebral palsy (p < 0.001). Subjects with untreated hydrocephalus most frequently presented macrocephaly (p < 0.001), including absolute macrocephaly (p = 0.001), and with tall stature (p = 0.007). Excessive body mass co-occurred more frequently with surgically untreated hydrocephalus, but the relationship was not statistically significant (p = 0.098). Conclusions: Surgically treated hydrocephalus occurred in patients with cerebral palsy and neural tube defects, and untreated hydrocephalus was present only in patients with neural tube defects. Untreated hydrocephalus negatively changed the course of individual development in the studied group of children, in contrast to surgically treated hydrocephalus.

[3] The first familial case of inherited intellectual developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies and behavioral abnormalities (IDDFBA) with a novel FBXO11 variant
    CG Lee, CA Seol, CS Ki (2020)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.61828 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.61828
    snippet: … During her physical examination at 40 years of age, she presented with macrocephaly: height 155.2 cm (−1.22 SDS), weight 50.2 kg (−0.59 SDS), and head circumference 54.2 cm (…
    abstract: Intellectual developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies and behavioral abnormalities (IDDFBA) caused by germline de novo variants in FBXO11 was recently recognized as a novel intellectual disability (ID) syndrome through reverse phenotyping after whole-exome sequencing (WES). Fewer than 50 disease-causing de novo FBXO11 variants in IDDFBA are reported thus far. Here, we present the first report of a family showing autosomal dominantly inherited IDDFBA, harboring a novel heterozygous variant in FBXO11 (c.2401_2405dup;p. Gly803Leufs*6) identified by WES. In this family, the mother and two daughters showed mild ID and mild facial dysmorphism. This finding is expected to increase our understanding of the genotype-phenotype of IDDFBA and to facilitate genetic counseling for the disorder caused by FBXO11.

[4] De novo missense variants in FBXW11 cause diverse developmental phenotypes including brain, eye, and digit anomalies
    RJ Holt, RM Young, B Crespo, F Ceroni… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30268-X
    snippet: … This approach, referred to as ‘‘reverse phenotyping,’’ has been successfully applied to multiple intellectual disability syndromes, including those related to genetic variants in FBXO11 (…
    abstract: The identification of genetic variants implicated in human developmental disorders has been revolutionized by second-generation sequencing combined with international pooling of cases. Here, we describe seven individuals who have diverse yet overlapping developmental anomalies, and who all have de novo missense FBXW11 variants identified by whole exome or whole genome sequencing and not reported in the gnomAD database. Their phenotypes include striking neurodevelopmental, digital, jaw, and eye anomalies, and in one individual, features resembling Noonan syndrome, a condition caused by dysregulated RAS signaling. FBXW11 encodes an F-box protein, part of the Skp1-cullin-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex, involved in ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and thus fundamental to many protein regulatory processes. FBXW11 targets include β-catenin and GLI transcription factors, key mediators of Wnt and Hh signaling, respectively, critical to digital, neurological, and eye development. Structural analyses indicate affected residues cluster at the surface of the loops of the substrate-binding domain of FBXW11, and the variants are predicted to destabilize the protein and/or its interactions. In situ hybridization studies on human and zebrafish embryonic tissues demonstrate FBXW11 is expressed in the developing eye, brain, mandibular processes, and limb buds or pectoral fins. Knockdown of the zebrafish FBXW11 orthologs fbxw11a and fbxw11b resulted in embryos with smaller, misshapen, and underdeveloped eyes and abnormal jaw and pectoral fin development. Our findings support the role of FBXW11 in multiple developmental processes, including those involving the brain, eye, digits, and jaw.

[5] Plenary Sessions
    JG Gleeson
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/6678fb930503fcddaed85fcea256dc98/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2044126
    snippet: … disrupting variants in FBXO11 in a neurodevelopmental … phenotype with increased head circumference, possibly by a … NEK3 perturbation in primary microcephaly, we generated …

[6] Clinical Characteristics
    (authors not shown)
    https://humandiseasegenes.nl/fbxo11/professionals/clinical-characteristics
    snippet: Most individuals with a mutation in FBXO11 ... Most individuals had normal head circumference, but both microcephaly and macrocephaly have been ...

[7] De novo missense variants in FBXO11 alter its protein ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC8825234 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8825234/
    snippet: by A Gregor · 2021 · Cited by 20 — Growth parameters are highly variable with short stature and microcephaly being more common than tall stature and macrocephaly. ... Head circumference was ...
    abstract: Recently, others and we identified de novo FBXO11 (F-Box only protein 11) variants as causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD). We now assembled clinical and mutational information on 23 additional individuals. The phenotypic spectrum remains highly variable, with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability as the core feature and behavioral anomalies, hypotonia and various facial dysmorphism as frequent aspects. The mutational spectrum includes intragenic deletions, likely gene disrupting and missense variants distributed across the protein. To further characterize the functional consequences of FBXO11 missense variants, we analyzed their effects on protein expression and localization by overexpression of 17 different mutant constructs in HEK293 and HeLa cells. We found that the majority of missense variants resulted in subcellular mislocalization and/or reduced FBXO11 protein expression levels. For instance, variants located in the nuclear localization signal and the N-terminal F-Box domain lead to altered subcellular localization with exclusion from the nucleus or the formation of cytoplasmic aggregates and to reduced protein levels in western blot. In contrast, variants localized in the C-terminal Zn-finger UBR domain lead to an accumulation in the cytoplasm without alteration of protein levels. Together with the mutational data, our functional results suggest that most missense variants likely lead to a loss of the original FBXO11 function and thereby highlight haploinsufficiency as the most likely disease mechanism for FBXO11-associated NDDs.

[8] Annals of Child Neurology
    (authors not shown)
    https://annchildneurol.org/m/journal/view.php?number=1392
    snippet: ... (FBXO11), F-box and WD repeat domain containing 7 ... Patients with FBXW11 pathogenic variants may exhibit microcephaly or macrocephaly ... head circumference ...

[9] De novo FBXO11 mutations are associated with intellectual disability and behavioural anomalies
    D Fritzen, A Kuechler, M Grimmel, J Becker, S Peters… (2018)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-018-1892-1 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-018-1892-1
    snippet: … , microcephaly, behavioural anomalies, and dysmorphisms. Thus, we confirm deleterious de novo mutations in FBXO11 as a … postnatal microcephaly or borderline small head size and …
    abstract: Intellectual disability (ID) has an estimated prevalence of 1.5-2%. In most affected individuals, its genetic basis remains unclear. Whole exome sequencing (WES) studies have identified a multitude of novel causative gene defects and have shown that a large proportion of sporadic ID cases results from de novo mutations. Here, we present two unrelated individuals with similar clinical features and deleterious de novo variants in FBXO11 detected by WES. Individual 1, a 14-year-old boy, has mild ID as well as mild microcephaly, corrected cleft lip and alveolus, hyperkinetic disorder, mild brain atrophy and minor facial dysmorphism. WES detected a heterozygous de novo 1 bp insertion in the splice donor site of exon 3. Individual 2, a 3-year-old boy, showed ID and pre- and postnatal growth retardation, postnatal mild microcephaly, hyperkinetic and restless behaviour, as well as mild dysmorphism. WES detected a heterozygous de novo frameshift mutation. While ten individuals with ID and de novo variants in FBXO11 have been reported as part of larger studies, only one of the reports has some additional clinical data. Interestingly, the latter individual carries the identical mutation as our individual 2 and also displays ID, intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly, behavioural anomalies, and dysmorphisms. Thus, we confirm deleterious de novo mutations in FBXO11 as a cause of ID and start the delineation of the associated clinical picture which may also comprise postnatal microcephaly or borderline small head size and behavioural anomalies.

[10] UBR5 loss-of-function variants in autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability: case series and review of the literature
    MS Reuter, NB Salazar, JL Howe, N Hoang… (2025)
    PMID:41318701 DOI:10.1038/s41525-025-00536-x https://www.nature.com/articles/s41525-025-00536-x
    snippet: … normal limits with a head circumference in the upper normal … tall stature, microcephaly or macrocephaly, epilepsy, movement … Haploinsufficiency of UBR6, currently known as FBXO11, is …
    abstract: UBR5 encodes an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase which targets distinct N-terminal residues of proteins for degradation. Heterozygous loss-of-function variants were reported in patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and developmental delay, and recently in a cohort of individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders and variable other features. Here, we report three unrelated individuals with de novo loss-of-function variants in UBR5, presenting with ASD and intellectual disability. We review the literature for other de novo predicted loss-of-function variants in probands with ASD or developmental delay (in total n = 11 variants), providing further evidence that UBR5 haploinsufficiency is associated with ASD and atypical neurodevelopmental trajectories, including developmental delay and intellectual disability.