SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Gene therapy targeting the inner retina rescues the retinal phenotype in a mouse model of CLN3 Batten disease
    SM kleine Holthaus, M Aristorena… (2020)
    DOI:10.1089/hum.2020.038 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/hum.2020.038
    snippet: … the postsynaptic entity of the photoreceptor ribbon synapses, did not reveal a significant … electronegative ERG in patients together with our study data strongly suggests that bipolar cell …
    abstract: The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), often referred to as Batten disease, are inherited lysosomal storage disorders that represent the most common neurodegeneration during childhood. Symptoms include seizures, vision loss, motor and cognitive decline, and premature death. The development of brain-directed treatments for NCLs has made noteworthy progress in recent years. Clinical trials are currently ongoing or planned for different forms of the disease. Despite these promising advances, it is unlikely that therapeutic interventions targeting the brain will prevent loss of vision in patients as retinal cells remain untreated and will continue to degenerate. Here, we demonstrate that <i>Cln3</i><sup>Δ<i>ex7/8</i></sup> mice, a mouse model of CLN3 Batten disease with juvenile onset, suffer from a decline in inner retinal function resulting from the death of rod bipolar cells, interneurons vital for signal transmission from photoreceptors to ganglion cells in the retina. We also show that this ocular phenotype can be treated by adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated expression of <i>CLN3</i> in cells of the inner retina, leading to significant survival of bipolar cells and preserved retinal function. In contrast, the treatment of photoreceptors, which are lost in patients at late disease stages, was not therapeutic in <i>Cln3</i><sup>Δ<i>ex7/8</i></sup> mice, underlining the notion that CLN3 disease is primarily a disease of the inner retina with secondary changes in the outer retina. These data indicate that bipolar cells play a central role in this disease and identify this cell type as an important target for ocular AAV-based gene therapies for CLN3 disease.

[2] Negative electroretinograms: genetic and acquired causes, diagnostic approaches and physiological insights
    X Jiang, OA Mahroo (2021)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41433-021-01604-z
    snippet: … release at the photoreceptor to bipolar cell synapse). A-wave … Variants in CLN3 can also give rise to a non-syndromic retinal … The electronegative ERG is an important finding. In genetic …
    abstract: The dark-adapted human electroretinogram (ERG) response to a standard bright flash includes a negative-going a-wave followed by a positive-going b-wave that crosses the baseline. An electronegative waveform (or negative ERG) results when the b-wave is selectively reduced such that the ERG fails to cross the baseline following the a-wave. In the context of a normally sized a-wave, it indicates a site of retinal dysfunction occurring after phototransduction (commonly at the photoreceptor to bipolar cell synapse). This is an important finding. In genetic disease, the pattern of ERG abnormality can point to variants in a small group of genes (frequently those associated with congenital stationary night blindness and X-linked retinoschisis, but negative ERGs can also be seen in other conditions including syndromic disease). In acquired disease, there are numerous causes, but specific features may point to melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR). In some cases, the visual symptoms precede the diagnosis of the melanoma and so the ERG findings can initiate investigations facilitating early detection and treatment. Negative ERGs can occur in other paraneoplastic conditions, and in a range of other diseases. This review will outline the physiological basis for the negative ERG, report prevalences in the literature from different cohorts, discuss the range of causes, displaying examples of a number of ERG phenotypes, highlight features of a clinical approach to patients, and briefly discuss further insights relating to current flows shaping the a-wave trough and from single-cell transcriptome analysis.

[3] Long-term progression of retinal degeneration in a preclinical model of CLN7 Batten disease as a baseline for testing clinical therapeutics
    AA Rowe, X Chen, ER Nettesheim, Y Issioui, T Dong… (2022)
    PMID:36374771 DOI:10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104314 https://www.thelancet.com/journals/ebiom/article/PIIS2352-3964(22)00496-0/fulltext
    snippet: … possible defect in photoreceptor to bipolar cell synaptic … patient displayed an electronegative ERG with reduced, but … Δex7/8 mouse model for CLN3 Batten disease displays a loss of the …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Batten disease is characterized by cognitive and motor impairment, retinal degeneration, and seizures leading to premature death. Recent studies have shown efficacy for a gene therapy approach for CLN7 Batten disease. This gene therapy approach is promising to treat cognitive and motor impairment, but is not likely to delay vision loss. Additionally, the natural progression of retinal degeneration in CLN7 Batten disease patients is not well-known.<h4>Methods</h4>We performed visual examinations on five patients with CLN7 Batten disease and found that patients were far progressed in degeneration within their first five years of life. To better understand the disease progression, we characterized the retina of a preclinical mouse model of CLN7 Batten disease, through the age at which mice present with paralysis and premature death.<h4>Findings</h4>We found that this preclinical model shows signs of photoreceptor to bipolar synaptic defects early, and displays rod-cone dystrophy with late loss of bipolar cells. This vision loss could be followed not only via histology, but using clinical live imaging similar to that used in human patients.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Natural history studies of rare paediatric neurodegenerative conditions are complicated by the rapid degeneration and limited availability of patients. Characterization of degeneration in the preclinical model allows for future experiments to better understand the mechanisms underlying the retinal disease progression in order to find therapeutics to treat patients, as well as to evaluate these therapeutic options for future human clinical trials.<h4>Funding</h4>Van Sickle Family Foundation Inc., NIHP30EY030413, Morton Fichtenbaum Charitable Trust and 5T32GM131945-03.

[4] The negative ERG: clinical phenotypes and disease mechanisms of inner retinal dysfunction
    I Audo, AG Robson, GE Holder… (2008)
    PMID:18191655 DOI:10.1016/j.survophthal.2007.10.010 https://www.surveyophthalmol.com/article/S0039-6257(07)00257-3/abstract
    snippet: … as a negative or electronegative ERG waveform because it is … the response of Müller cells to bipolar cell activity. However, it is … retinal localization of the gene product for CLN3.Because …
    abstract: Inner retinal dysfunction is encountered in a number of retinal disorders, either inherited or acquired, as a primary or predominant defect. Fundus examination is rarely diagnostic in these disorders, although some show characteristic features, and careful electrophysiological assessment of retinal function is needed for accurate diagnosis. The ERG in inner retinal dysfunction typically shows a negative waveform with a preserved a-wave and a selectively reduced b-wave. Advances in retinal physiology and molecular genetics have led to a greater understanding of the pathogenesis of these disorders. This review summarizes current knowledge on normal retinal physiology, the investigative techniques used and the range of clinical disorders in which there is predominantly inner retinal dysfunction.

[5] Early recognition of CLN3 disease facilitated by visual electrophysiology and multimodal imaging
    DH Sakti, EE Cornish, CL Fraser, BM Nash… (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10633-023-09930-1
    snippet: … patients in our study centre had an electronegative ERG, … in the synaptic space, with animal models of CLN3 disease … where there were significant bipolar cell survival and preserved …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis is a group of neurodegenerative disorders with varying visual dysfunction. CLN3 is a subtype which commonly presents with visual decline. Visual symptomatology can be indistinct making early diagnosis difficult. This study reports ocular biomarkers of CLN3 patients to assist clinicians in early diagnosis, disease monitoring, and future therapy.<h4>Methods</h4>Retrospective review of 5 confirmed CLN3 patients in our eye clinic. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), electroretinogram (ERG), ultra-widefield (UWF) fundus photography and fundus autofluorescence (FAF), and optical coherence tomography (OCT) studies were undertaken.<h4>Results</h4>Five unrelated children, 4 females and 1 male, with median age of 6.2 years (4.6-11.7) at first assessment were investigated at the clinic from 2016 to 2021. Four homozygous and one heterozygous pathogenic CLN3 variants were found. Best corrected visual acuities (BCVAs) ranged from 0.18 to 0.88 logMAR at first presentation. Electronegative ERGs were identified in all patients. Bull's eye maculopathies found in all patients. Hyper-autofluorescence ring surrounding hypo-autofluorescence fovea on FAF was found. Foveal ellipsoid zone (EZ) disruptions were found in all patients with additional inner and outer retinal microcystic changes in one patient. Neurological problems noted included autism, anxiety, motor dyspraxia, behavioural issue, and psychomotor regression.<h4>Conclusions</h4>CLN3 patients presented at median age 6.2 years with visual decline. Early onset maculopathy with an electronegative ERG and variable cognitive and motor decline should prompt further investigations including neuropaediatric evaluation and genetic assessment for CLN3 disease. The structural parameters such as EZ and FAF will facilitate ocular monitoring.

[6] Juvenile Batten Disease (CLN3): Detailed Ocular Phenotype ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:31926949 DOI:10.1016/j.oret.2019.11.005 https://ouci.dntb.gov.ua/en/works/7AeApqk7/
    snippet: ... Cln3 associated with delayed-classic juvenile ... electronegative ERG and variable cognitive and ... bipolar cell synapse). This is an important ...
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>To characterize the retinal phenotype of juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL), highlight delayed and mistaken diagnosis, and propose an algorithm for early identification.<h4>Design</h4>Retrospective case series.<h4>Participants</h4>Eight children (5 female) with JNCL.<h4>Methods</h4>Review of clinical notes, retinal imaging including fundus autofluorescence and OCT, electroretinography (ERG), and both microscopy and molecular genetic testing.<h4>Main outcome measurements</h4>Demographic data, signs and symptoms, visual acuity (VA), fundus autofluorescence and OCT findings, ERG phenotype, and microscopy/molecular genetics.<h4>Results</h4>Participants presented with rapid bilateral vision loss over 1 to 18 months, with mean VA deteriorating from 0.44 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) (range, 0.20-1.78 logMAR) at baseline to 1.34 logMAR (0.30 logMAR - light perception) at last follow-up. Age of onset ranged from 3 to 7 years (mean, 5.3 years). The age at diagnosis of JNCL ranged from 7 to 10 years (mean, 8.3 years). Six children displayed eccentric fixation, and 6 children had cognitive or neurologic signs at the time of diagnosis (75%). Seven patients had bilateral bull's-eye maculopathy at presentation. Coats-like exudative vasculopathy, not previously reported in JNCL, was observed in 1 patient. OCT imaging revealed near complete loss of outer retinal layers and marked atrophy of the nerve fiber and ganglion cell layers at the central macula. An electronegative ERG was present in 4 patients (50%), but with additional a-wave reduction, there was an undetectable ERG in the remaining 4 patients. Blood film microscopy revealed vacuolated lymphocytes, and electron microscopy showed lysosomal (fingerprint) inclusions in all 8 patients.<h4>Conclusions</h4>In a young child with bilateral rapidly progressive vision loss and macular disturbance, blood film microscopy to detect vacuolated lymphocytes is a rapid, readily accessible, and sensitive screening test for JNCL. Early suspicion of JNCL can be aided by detailed directed history and high-resolution retinal imaging, with subsequent targeted microscopy/genetic testing. Early diagnosis is critical to ensure appropriate management, counseling, support, and social care for children and their families. Furthermore, although potential therapies for this group of disorders are in early-phase clinical trial, realistic expectations are that successful intervention will be mo

[7] The dystrophic retina in multisystem disorders: the electroretinogram in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
    RG Weleber (1998)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/eye1998148
    snippet: … electronegative configuration suggested the primary defect … outer segments but did severely disturb transmission (either pre- or … for CLN3 to mitochondria of Miiller cells and inner retinal …
    abstract: The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) are neurodegenerative disorders with psychomotor deterioration, seizures, visual failure and premature death, all associated with abnormal storage of lipoproteins within lysosomes. The most common forms of NCL are an infantile form (INCL, CLN1), a late infantile form (LINCL, CLN2) and a juvenile onset form (JNCL, CLN3). The electroretinogram (ERG) is abnormal early in all three of these forms and eventually is totally ablated. The purpose of this report is to describe the ERG in INCL, LINCL and JNCL. The ERGs of 7 patients who were examined by the author over the past 15 years were reviewed. Ganzfeld ERG responses were recorded using the ISCEV standard protocol and an intensity response series over a 3.7 log unit range. The earliest ERG manifestation of INCL is a marked loss of the scotopic and photopic b-wave with relative preservation of the a-wave; this defect, which was evident for both rods and cones, suggests preservation of photoreceptor outer segment function with severe disturbance of transmission of the signal to the second-order neuron, the bipolar cells. For LINCL, the rod responses were mildly abnormal but more preserved than in INCL or JNCL. The cone b-wave amplitudes in patients with early LINCL were severely subnormal with prolonged implicit times. Patients with JNCL invariably showed severe to profound ERG abnormalities when first tested, with essentially no rod-mediated activity and marked loss of a-wave amplitudes with even greater loss of b-wave amplitudes, creating electronegative configuration waveforms. Differences in the ERG responses were thus found that provide further clues to the earliest site of pathology within the retina.

[8] Large-scale phenotyping of an accurate genetic mouse model of JNCL identifies novel early pathology outside the central nervous system
    JF Staropoli, L Haliw, S Biswas, L Garrett, SM Hölter… (2012)
    PMID:22701626 DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0038310 https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0038310
    snippet: … mice indicated additional retinal degeneration genetic loci, independent of the Cln3 locus, … aging Cln3?ex7/8 mice congenic on the C57BL/6N background by electroretinography (ERG) …
    abstract: Cln3(Δex7/8) mice harbor the most common genetic defect causing juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL), an autosomal recessive disease involving seizures, visual, motor and cognitive decline, and premature death. Here, to more thoroughly investigate the manifestations of the common JNCL mutation, we performed a broad phenotyping study of Cln3(Δex7/8) mice. Homozygous Cln3(Δex7/8) mice, congenic on a C57BL/6N background, displayed subtle deficits in sensory and motor tasks at 10-14 weeks of age. Homozygous Cln3(Δex7/8) mice also displayed electroretinographic changes reflecting cone function deficits past 5 months of age and a progressive decline of retinal post-receptoral function. Metabolic analysis revealed increases in rectal body temperature and minimum oxygen consumption in 12-13 week old homozygous Cln3(Δex7/8) mice, which were also seen to a lesser extent in heterozygous Cln3(Δex7/8) mice. Heart weight was slightly increased at 20 weeks of age, but no significant differences were observed in cardiac function in young adults. In a comprehensive blood analysis at 15-16 weeks of age, serum ferritin concentrations, mean corpuscular volume of red blood cells (MCV), and reticulocyte counts were reproducibly increased in homozygous Cln3(Δ) (ex7/8) mice, and male homozygotes had a relative T-cell deficiency, suggesting alterations in hematopoiesis. Finally, consistent with findings in JNCL patients, vacuolated peripheral blood lymphocytes were observed in homozygous Cln3(Δ) (ex7/8) neonates, and to a greater extent in older animals. Early onset, severe vacuolation in clear cells of the epididymis of male homozygous Cln3(Δ) (ex7/8) mice was also observed. These data highlight additional organ systems in which to study CLN3 function, and early phenotypes have been established in homozygous Cln3(Δ) (ex7/8) mice that merit further study for JNCL biomarker development.

[9] the electroretinogram in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:9775220 DOI:10.1038/eye.1998.148 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9775220/
    snippet: by RG Weleber · 1998 · Cited by 130 — Patients with JNCL invariably showed severe to profound ERG abnormalities when first tested, with essentially no rod-mediated activity and marked loss of a-wave ...
    abstract: The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) are neurodegenerative disorders with psychomotor deterioration, seizures, visual failure and premature death, all associated with abnormal storage of lipoproteins within lysosomes. The most common forms of NCL are an infantile form (INCL, CLN1), a late infantile form (LINCL, CLN2) and a juvenile onset form (JNCL, CLN3). The electroretinogram (ERG) is abnormal early in all three of these forms and eventually is totally ablated. The purpose of this report is to describe the ERG in INCL, LINCL and JNCL. The ERGs of 7 patients who were examined by the author over the past 15 years were reviewed. Ganzfeld ERG responses were recorded using the ISCEV standard protocol and an intensity response series over a 3.7 log unit range. The earliest ERG manifestation of INCL is a marked loss of the scotopic and photopic b-wave with relative preservation of the a-wave; this defect, which was evident for both rods and cones, suggests preservation of photoreceptor outer segment function with severe disturbance of transmission of the signal to the second-order neuron, the bipolar cells. For LINCL, the rod responses were mildly abnormal but more preserved than in INCL or JNCL. The cone b-wave amplitudes in patients with early LINCL were severely subnormal with prolonged implicit times. Patients with JNCL invariably showed severe to profound ERG abnormalities when first tested, with essentially no rod-mediated activity and marked loss of a-wave amplitudes with even greater loss of b-wave amplitudes, creating electronegative configuration waveforms. Differences in the ERG responses were thus found that provide further clues to the earliest site of pathology within the retina.

[10] Electroretinographic and clinicopathologic correlations of ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1096719204001702
    snippet: by RG Weleber · 2004 · Cited by 74 — Because CLN3 is not thought to be expressed in photoreceptors, subsequent photoreceptor degeneration may be a secondary event. The infantile form of ceroid ...
    abstract: Infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (INCL) is an autosomal recessive disease that results from deficiency of palmitoyl-protein thioesterase-1 (PPT1). INCL leads to retinal blindness, neurodegeneration, and early death. We studied the clinical features and electroretinogram (ERG) in three patients and histopathologic and immunofluorescence analyses of the retina in the third patient, who died at 3 years 2 months of age. The ERGs for the 2 youngest patients (ages 1.7 and 2.3 years) showed normal scotopic bright flash a-wave amplitudes with severe loss of b-wave (electronegative ERG), indicating dysfunction at or proximal to the photoreceptor inner segments. The third patient at 2.9 years of age showed subnormal a-wave amplitudes and even greater loss of b-wave amplitudes. Histopathology revealed reduced cell numbers in all retinal layers, including the inner nuclear layer (INL), and a central epiretinal membrane. Autofluorescent lipofuscin granules were present in all neuronal cell types in the retina. Cones and rods in the parafoveal area were labeled with a cone cytoplasmic marker, mAb 7G6, and anti-rhodopsin, respectively, and had extremely short outer segments. The periphery showed better preservation but photoreceptor outer segments were short. Immunofluorescence revealed degenerate rods and cones throughout the retina with better preservation in the periphery. Autofluorescent lipofuscin was found in all cell types, including cone inner segments, to a greater degree than seen in normal ageing. The ERG findings support the existence early in the disease of a relative pre- or post-synaptic block of effective neurotransmission from photoreceptor inner segments to the second order bipolar neurons.