SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are … of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[2] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … Biallelic variants in the SNUPN gene were recently shown to … childhood- onset limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMDR29, … Whole body muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[3] Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) existing registries and natural history studies: Where do we stand?
    E Faedo, I Tahiri, C Alimi, H Shoaito… (2026)
    DOI:10.1177/22143602251355316 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/22143602251355316
    snippet: … Muscle imaging, most frequently using MRI, was included as … iants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with … of muscular MRI images in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (…
    abstract: <h4>Introduction</h4>Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs) are heterogeneous inherited disorders with no cure, including 29 recessive (LGMDR) and 5 dominant forms (LGMDD), characterized by proximal muscle weakness. Finding a cure for LGMD is difficult due to the their slow evolution for which comprehensive data collection through registries, network, and natural history studies is pivotal.<h4>Methods</h4>We conducted a review following PRISMA guidelines searching in PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science for articles published between 2000-2025, focusing on LGMD registries, networks, and natural history studies. We included observational studies, cohort designs, and registry-based studies.<h4>Results</h4>Among 443 records, 38 studies were included, 10 registries, 4 networks, and 17 natural history studies respectively. Registries varied in scope, with many focused on specific LGMD subtypes. Natural history studies were predominantly subtype-specific, poorly linked to registries. Only 12 studies were connected to registries or networks, and most performed in Europe and North America.<h4>Discussion</h4>Registries, networks, and natural history studies showed considerable design variability, leading to challenges with data interoperability and underscoring the need for standardization. Despite regional coverage, low-income countries are underrepresented in the data. The limited linkage between natural history studies and registries presents a missed opportunity to leverage well-characterized cohorts. Many registries and networks remain unpublished, limiting available data for global research.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Registries are crucial, benefiting patients, clinicians, researchers, and industries. The scarcity of natural history studies hinders the development of centralized datasets. Standardizing registry design, improving data interoperability, and enhancing patient diversity are critical to boost LGMD research.

[4] SNUPN deficiency causes a recessive muscular dystrophy due to RNA mis-splicing and ECM dysregulation
    M Nashabat, N Nabavizadeh, HP Saraçoğlu… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-45933-5
    snippet: … in mutant cells and patient muscle tissues. Our findings establish SNUPN deficiency as the … abnormalities observed in the patients who underwent MRI examination, it is advisable to …
    abstract: SNURPORTIN-1, encoded by SNUPN, plays a central role in the nuclear import of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins. However, its physiological function remains unexplored. In this study, we investigate 18 children from 15 unrelated families who present with atypical muscular dystrophy and neurological defects. Nine hypomorphic SNUPN biallelic variants, predominantly clustered in the last coding exon, are ascertained to segregate with the disease. We demonstrate that mutant SPN1 failed to oligomerize leading to cytoplasmic aggregation in patients' primary fibroblasts and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated mutant cell lines. Additionally, mutant nuclei exhibit defective spliceosomal maturation and breakdown of Cajal bodies. Transcriptome analyses reveal splicing and mRNA expression dysregulation, particularly in sarcolemmal components, causing disruption of cytoskeletal organization in mutant cells and patient muscle tissues. Our findings establish SNUPN deficiency as the genetic etiology of a previously unrecognized subtype of muscular dystrophy and provide robust evidence of the role of SPN1 for muscle homeostasis.

[5] SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells
    M Okubo, M Ogawa, N Eura, YU Inoue, K Dewa, T Owa… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/3/1007/8483316
    snippet: … SNUPN gene were identified as a cause of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), with skeletal muscle … These findings were confirmed by high-resolution imaging with a nuclear …
    abstract: Mutations in the SNUPN gene, which encodes snurportin-1, a nuclear import adaptor for U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP), have recently been implicated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, attributed to disrupted pre-messenger RNA splicing in skeletal muscle. U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins play a vital role in pre-messenger RNA splicing, a process essential for transcript fidelity and the regulation of gene expression across tissues. However, the impact of SNUPN mutations on the CNS remains unclear. We identified pathogenic variants in the SNUPN gene in two families with spinocerebellar atrophy. One patient exhibited mild changes in skeletal muscle, while the other did not. To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms, nuclear transport of the mutated snurpotin-1, and its interaction with importin beta were analysed in vitro. Then, we generated a knock-in mouse carrying the patients' variants and assessed its motor function and cerebellar morphology in vivo. Furthermore, we analysed U1 snRNP localization and RNA splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells by both RNA- and single-cell RNA sequencing. Mutated snurportin-1 displayed impaired nuclear transport and reduced binding to importin beta. The knock-in mouse mimicking the compound heterozygous variants exhibited cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy and dendritic abnormalities in Purkinje cells. Abnormal RNA splicing and reduced expression were observed in many genes related to neuronal development and synaptic organization in Purkinje cells, leading to an immature cytoskeleton and reduced secretion of sonic hedgehog. The defects in Purkinje cells caused secondary abnormalities in granule cell migration and interneuron development. Our findings suggest that snurportin-1 plays a critical role in cerebellar development through U1 snRNP-mediated RNA processing and that its dysfunction may contribute to spinocerebellar ataxia. These results expand the clinical spectrum of SNUPN-related disorders beyond skeletal muscle and highlight splicing dysregulation as a potential mechanism underlying cerebellar atrophy.

[6] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38366623/
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[7] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features ... Patients with SNUPN variants show a common pattern in MRI.
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[8] SNUPN joins the list of genes involved in muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.institut-myologie.org/en/research/snupn-joins-the-list-of-genes-involved-in-muscular-dystrophies/
    snippet: Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features. Iruzubieta, P., Damborenea, A., Ioghen ...

[9] 620793 - MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620793
    snippet: Muscle MRI showed variable ... Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features.

[10] Medline ® Abstracts for References 76,78 of 'Limb-girdle ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/limb-girdle-muscular-dystrophy/abstract/76,78
    snippet: In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, ...