SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant cerebellar ataxia
    R Miyamoto, A Sakane, H Morino… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/35/3/ddaf186/8415318
    snippet: … by mild gait spasticity and tremors. Variable features of … the conserved switch II region of Rab3A, a domain critical for … features contributed to intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity. …
    abstract: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders caused by pathogenic variants in more than 40 genes with diverse cellular functions. In this study, we identified the c.247C > T p.(Arg83Trp) variant in RAB3A, encoding a small GTPase involved in membrane-associated regulated exocytosis, in two families with cerebellar ataxia. Affected individuals presented with adult-onset, gradually progressive cerebellar symptoms, often accompanied by mild gait spasticity and tremors. Variable features of neurodevelopmental disorders were also observed. Brain MRI consistently revealed cerebellar atrophy, often accentuated in the vermis, and neuropathological examinations demonstrated diffuse cerebellar cortical degeneration. Functionally, the R83W mutation lies within the conserved switch II region of Rab3A, a domain critical for effector interaction. Although the mutant Rab3A R83W retained GTP-binding affinity, it failed to bind the key effector proteins RIM1 and Rabphilin-3A, highlighting the functional importance of R83 in effector complex formation, as supported by structural analysis. In PC12 cells, the R83W mutant exhibited diffuse cytoplasmic localization, in contrast to the vesicle- and neurite-tip localization of the wild-type and GTP-bound Rab3A mutant. The concordant localization pattern of R83W and GDP-bound Rab3A mutants suggests that R83W-induced mislocalization results from a failure to engage downstream effector proteins. In the cerebellum, Rab3A was predominantly localized to parallel fiber terminals and was absent from postsynaptic Purkinje cells. These findings suggest that disruption of the interaction between Rab3A and its effector proteins may underlie disease pathogenesis, possibly involving presynaptic dysfunction at parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses mediated by the Rab3A-RIM1 complex.

[2] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a partial loss-of-function mechanism
    H Hengel, SB Hannan, S Reich, D Beijer, J Roller… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/8/2812/8102230
    snippet: … Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as … with rare heterozygous RAB3A variants and ataxia–spasticity spectrum 26 phenotype features. …
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[3] Expanding the clinical spectrum of RAB3A: from cerebellar ataxia to spastic paraplegia
    C Mouraux, JL Méreaux, CS Davoine, L Guillot (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/11/e96/8175149
    snippet: … pathogenic variants in RAB3A in our cohort of 1235 exomes from ataxia and/or spastic paraplegia patients was 0.81%. Our findings expand the phenotypic spectrum of RAB3A-related …

[4] Genome-wide association studies and fine mapping for spastic syndrome in Holstein cattle
    A Neustaeter (2015)
    https://atrium.lib.uoguelph.ca/bitstreams/01f5a9e9-0515-4b40-a134-ebea81816ce1/download
    snippet: … 2 ) for SNPs within the RAB3A gene located on chromosome 7, obtained from Haploview. Each … inherited trait associated with a striking phenotype, Spastic Syndrome is more complex …

[5] Tied up: Does altering phosphoinositide-mediated membrane trafficking influence neurodegenerative disease phenotypes? Sravanthi SP Nadiminti et al.
    SSP Nadiminti, M Kamak, SP Koushika (2018)
    PMID:30027907 DOI:10.1007/s12041-018-0961-5 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12041-018-0961-5
    snippet: … For example, hereditary spastic paraplegia like phenotypes, such as nodding tremor, spastic gait … with Rab10 but not with Rab8a or Rab3a. LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of RAB8a …
    abstract: Phosphoinositides are a class of membrane lipids that are found on several intracellular compartments and play diverse roles inside cells, such as vesicle formation, protein trafficking, endocytosis etc. Intracellular distribution and levels of phosphoinositides are regulated by enzymes that generate and breakdown these lipids as well as other proteins that associate with phosphoinositides. These events lead to differing levels of specific phosphoinositides on different intracellular compartments. At these intracellular locations, phosphoinositides and their associated proteins, such as Rab GTPases, dynamin and BAR domain-containing proteins, regulate a variety of membrane trafficking pathways. Neurodegenerative phenotypes in disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD) can arise as a consequence of altered or hampered intracellular trafficking. Altered trafficking can cause proteins such as α-synuclein to aggregate intracellularly. Several trafficking pathways are regulated bymaster regulators such as LRRK2,which is known to regulate the activity of phosphoinositide effector proteins. Perturbing either the levels of phosphoinositides or their interactions with different proteins disrupts intracellular trafficking pathways, contributing to phenotypes often observed in disorders such as Alzheimer's or PDs. Thus, studying phosphoinositide regulation and its role in trafficking can give us a deeper understanding of the contribution of disrupted trafficking to neurodegenerative phenotypes.

[6] Entry - #621535 - SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 52; SCA52
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621535
    snippet: A number sign (#) is used with this entry because of evidence that spinocerebellar ataxia-52 (SCA52) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the RAB3A gene ( ...

[7] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:40166812 DOI:10.1093/brain/awaf111 PMC12316009 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12316009/
    snippet: by H Hengel · 2025 · Cited by 8 — Screening for RAB3A variants in patients with ataxia–spasticity spectrum phenotypes also resulted in an additional phenotypic cluster: a neurodevelopmental ...
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[8] Ataxia: Dominant
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/ataxia/domatax.html
    snippet: ... Spasticity: GFAP; 17q21. Episodic ataxia + Epilepsy: SCN2A; 2q24 ... RAB3A (RAB3A) ; Chromosome 19p13.11; Dominant, de novo. Epidemiology: > 30 ...

[9] 1 Title: An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal- ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.07.16.25330541.full.pdf https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.07.16.25330541.full.pdf
    snippet: by R Miyamoto · 2025 — In this study, we identified a pathogenic RAB3A variant, c.247C>T p.(Arg83Trp), in two families with adult-onset cerebellar ataxia and variable ...

[10] An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/394696145_An_R83W_mutation_in_Rab3A_causes_autosomal-dominant_cerebellar_ataxia
    snippet: Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction ...
    abstract: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders caused by pathogenic variants in more than 40 genes with diverse cellular functions. In this study, we identified the c.247C > T p.(Arg83Trp) variant in RAB3A, encoding a small GTPase involved in membrane-associated regulated exocytosis, in two families with cerebellar ataxia. Affected individuals presented with adult-onset, gradually progressive cerebellar symptoms, often accompanied by mild gait spasticity and tremors. Variable features of neurodevelopmental disorders were also observed. Brain MRI consistently revealed cerebellar atrophy, often accentuated in the vermis, and neuropathological examinations demonstrated diffuse cerebellar cortical degeneration. Functionally, the R83W mutation lies within the conserved switch II region of Rab3A, a domain critical for effector interaction. Although the mutant Rab3A R83W retained GTP-binding affinity, it failed to bind the key effector proteins RIM1 and Rabphilin-3A, highlighting the functional importance of R83 in effector complex formation, as supported by structural analysis. In PC12 cells, the R83W mutant exhibited diffuse cytoplasmic localization, in contrast to the vesicle- and neurite-tip localization of the wild-type and GTP-bound Rab3A mutant. The concordant localization pattern of R83W and GDP-bound Rab3A mutants suggests that R83W-induced mislocalization results from a failure to engage downstream effector proteins. In the cerebellum, Rab3A was predominantly localized to parallel fiber terminals and was absent from postsynaptic Purkinje cells. These findings suggest that disruption of the interaction between Rab3A and its effector proteins may underlie disease pathogenesis, possibly involving presynaptic dysfunction at parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses mediated by the Rab3A-RIM1 complex.