SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … - onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings. Methods: Clinical evaluation, … variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adultonset proximo- distal …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[2] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. … In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[3] Facing the challenges to shorten the diagnostic odyssey: first Whole Genome Sequencing experience of a Colombian cohort with suspected rare diseases
    HM Velasco, A Bertoli (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01609-8
    snippet: … regardless of the current phenotype. The selection of over … a novel common variant in SNUPN. This helped to establish … previously unrecognized subtype of muscular dystrophy [43]. …
    abstract: Exome and genome sequencing (ES/GS) are routinely used for the diagnosis of genetic diseases in developed countries. However, their implementation is limited in countries from Latin America. We aimed to describe the results of GS in patients with suspected rare genetic diseases in Colombia. We studied 501 patients from 22 healthcare sites from January to December 2022. GS was performed in the index cases using dried blood spots on filtercards. Ancestry analysis was performed under iAdmix. Multiomic testing was performed when needed (biomarker, enzymatic activity, RNA-seq). All tests were performed at an accredited genetic laboratory. Ethnicity prediction data confirmed that 401 patients (80%) were mainly of Amerindian origin. A genetic diagnosis was established for 142 patients with a 28.3% diagnostic yield. The highest diagnostic yield was achieved for pathologies with a metabolic component and syndromic disorders (p < 0.001). Young children had a median of 1 year of diagnostic odyssey, while the median time for adults was significantly longer (15 years). Patients with genetic syndromes have spent more than 75% of their life without a diagnosis, while for patients with neurologic and neuromuscular diseases, the time of the diagnostic odyssey tended to decrease with age. Previous testing, specifically karyotyping or chromosomal microarray were significantly associated with a longer time to reach a definitive diagnosis (p < 0.01). Furthermore, one out of five patients that had an ES before could be diagnosed by GS. The Colombian genome project is the first Latin American study reporting the experience of systematic use of diagnostic GS in rare diseases.

[4] Drosophila melanogaster: A Model Organism in Muscular Dystrophy Studies
    Y Zhao, Y Wang, A Tulehalede, Z Meng, L Xu… (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/26/4/1459
    snippet: … The Snupn gene encodes Snurportin, a protein essential for the … SNUPN in Drosophila, results in reduction in locomotor capacity and decreased lifespan, both of which are phenotypes …
    abstract: Muscular dystrophy is a group of complicated, genetically heterogeneous disorders characterized by progressive muscle weakness and degeneration. Due to the intricate nature, understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying muscular dystrophy presents significant challenges. <i>Drosophila</i>, as a versatile and genetically tractable model organism, offers substantial advantages in muscular dystrophy research. In the present review, we summarize the application of <i>Drosophila</i> in studying various types of muscular dystrophy, highlighting the insights gained through genetic manipulations, disease modeling, and the exploration of molecular pathways. <i>Drosophila</i> serves as a powerful system for understanding disease progression, exploring the roles of key genes in muscle function and pathology, and identifying novel therapeutic targets. The review highlights the significant role of <i>Drosophila</i> in advancing our understanding of muscular dystrophy.

[5] Genetic SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in Purkinje cells
    M Okubo, M Ogawa, N Eura, YU Inoue, K Dewa, T Owa… (2024)
    DOI:10.1101/2024.07.11.24310169.abstract https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.07.11.24310169.abstract
    snippet: … To characterize the variant-related phenotypes, we tried to generate homozygous mice by … girdle muscular dystrophy and SCA are allelic disorders caused by biallelic SNUPN variants. …

[6] SNUPN-Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41054283/
    snippet: So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as ...
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[7] (PDF) SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396259358_SNUPN-Related_Muscular_Dystrophy_Novel_Phenotypic_Pathological_and_Functional_Protein_Insights
    snippet: Here we report the first family with SNUPN‐related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult‐onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings. Methods ...

[8] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene.
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[9] SNUPN-Related Muscular Dystrophy: novel phenotypic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://deustoteka.deusto.es/items/041708db-7e8d-4a4e-bbaa-c573b102a5f5/full
    snippet: Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings. Methods: ...
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[10] SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells
    M Okubo, M Ogawa, N Eura, YU Inoue, K Dewa, T Owa… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/3/1007/8483316
    snippet: … These results indicate that muscle weakness in I312Y*/… CAMK2A, exhibited abnormal splicing patterns, which may underlie … studies linking SNUPN variants to muscular dystrophy, our …
    abstract: Mutations in the SNUPN gene, which encodes snurportin-1, a nuclear import adaptor for U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP), have recently been implicated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, attributed to disrupted pre-messenger RNA splicing in skeletal muscle. U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins play a vital role in pre-messenger RNA splicing, a process essential for transcript fidelity and the regulation of gene expression across tissues. However, the impact of SNUPN mutations on the CNS remains unclear. We identified pathogenic variants in the SNUPN gene in two families with spinocerebellar atrophy. One patient exhibited mild changes in skeletal muscle, while the other did not. To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms, nuclear transport of the mutated snurpotin-1, and its interaction with importin beta were analysed in vitro. Then, we generated a knock-in mouse carrying the patients' variants and assessed its motor function and cerebellar morphology in vivo. Furthermore, we analysed U1 snRNP localization and RNA splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells by both RNA- and single-cell RNA sequencing. Mutated snurportin-1 displayed impaired nuclear transport and reduced binding to importin beta. The knock-in mouse mimicking the compound heterozygous variants exhibited cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy and dendritic abnormalities in Purkinje cells. Abnormal RNA splicing and reduced expression were observed in many genes related to neuronal development and synaptic organization in Purkinje cells, leading to an immature cytoskeleton and reduced secretion of sonic hedgehog. The defects in Purkinje cells caused secondary abnormalities in granule cell migration and interneuron development. Our findings suggest that snurportin-1 plays a critical role in cerebellar development through U1 snRNP-mediated RNA processing and that its dysfunction may contribute to spinocerebellar ataxia. These results expand the clinical spectrum of SNUPN-related disorders beyond skeletal muscle and highlight splicing dysregulation as a potential mechanism underlying cerebellar atrophy.