SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] De novo SPTAN1 mutation in axonal sensorimotor neuropathy and developmental disorder
    E Ylikallio, N Ritari, M Sainio, J Toppila, S Kivirikko… (2020)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/143/12/e104/5989775
    snippet: … a haploinsufficiency mechanism of disease. Before this, alterations of SPTAN1 have been … report of a de novo SPTAN1 mutation as the cause of a peripheral neuropathy. Our patient’s …

[2] Spectrins: molecular organizers and targets of neurological disorders
    DN Lorenzo, RJ Edwards, AL Slavutsky (2023)
    PMID:36697767 DOI:10.1038/s41583-022-00674-6 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41583-022-00674-6
    snippet: … , neural tube and cardiac anomalies, haploinsufficiency does not affect the lifespan or … neuropathy phenotypes reported for some affected individuals carrying diseaselinked SPTAN1 …
    abstract: Spectrins are cytoskeletal proteins that are expressed ubiquitously in the mammalian nervous system. Pathogenic variants in SPTAN1, SPTBN1, SPTBN2 and SPTBN4, four of the six genes encoding neuronal spectrins, cause neurological disorders. Despite their structural similarity and shared role as molecular organizers at the cell membrane, spectrins vary in expression, subcellular localization and specialization in neurons, and this variation partly underlies non-overlapping disease presentations across spectrinopathies. Here, we summarize recent progress in discerning the local and long-range organization and diverse functions of neuronal spectrins. We provide an overview of functional studies using mouse models, which, together with growing human genetic and clinical data, are helping to illuminate the aetiology of neurological spectrinopathies. These approaches are all critical on the path to plausible therapeutic solutions.

[3] Progressive Ataxia, Memory Impairments, and Seizure Episodes in Spna2 R1098Q Mouse Variant Affecting Alpha II Spectrin's Scaffold Stability
    M Zalas, J Skrzymowska, A Miążek, A Miazek (2023)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3425/13/2/261
    snippet: … SPTAN1 encephalopathies in laboratory animals has been challenging partially because no haploinsufficiency-… performance of a dominant-negative murine Spna2 (SPTAN1) variant …

[4] Nonsense mutations in alpha-II spectrin in three families with juvenile onset hereditary motor neuropathy
    D Beijer, T Deconinck, JL De Bleecker, MT Dotti… (2019)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/142/9/2605/5536902
    snippet: … SPTAN1 by means of NGS in three unrelated families with an inherited peripheral motor neuropathy … mechanisms (dominant-negative, gain-of-function and haploinsufficiency) is …
    abstract: Distal hereditary motor neuropathies are a rare subgroup of inherited peripheral neuropathies hallmarked by a length-dependent axonal degeneration of lower motor neurons without significant involvement of sensory neurons. We identified patients with heterozygous nonsense mutations in the αII-spectrin gene, SPTAN1, in three separate dominant hereditary motor neuropathy families via next-generation sequencing. Variable penetrance was noted for these mutations in two of three families, and phenotype severity differs greatly between patients. The mutant mRNA containing nonsense mutations is broken down by nonsense-mediated decay and leads to reduced protein levels in patient cells. Previously, dominant-negative αII-spectrin gene mutations were described as causal in a spectrum of epilepsy phenotypes.

[5] SPTAN1 variants likely cause autosomal recessive complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia
    F Xie, S Chen, P Liu, X Chen, W Luo (2022)
    PMID:34526651 DOI:10.1038/s10038-021-00975-1 https://www.nature.com/articles/s10038-021-00975-1
    snippet: … disability, early infantile epileptic encephalopathies, and severe … SPTAN1 variants range from axonal neuropathy phenotypes … mechanisms (dominant-negative and haploinsufficiency). …
    abstract: Heterozygous mutations in SPTAN1 are associated with a broad phenotypical spectrum ranging from axonal neuropathy phenotypes to neurodevelopmental phenotypes with or without epilepsy. Recently, biallelic mutations in SPTAN1 were reported as a potential cause of autosomal recessive pure hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). However, no further HSP cases with biallelic SPTAN1 mutations have been reported. Herein, we report the clinical and genetic findings of a patient with complicated HSP likely caused by a novel homozygous SPTAN1 mutation. A patient with complicated HSP from a consanguineous family was recruited. The proband underwent detailed neurological examinations. Homozygosity mapping was performed in the proband and her healthy sister. Whole exome sequencing was performed in the proband. Our patient had early onset motor symptoms with upper motor neuron paralysis and intellectual disability, which is compatible with complicated HSP. Genetic analysis identified a rare homozygous missense mutation in SPTAN1 (c.4162A>G, p.I1388V), which was predicted to be deleterious by in silico tools. Her healthy parents and sister all carried the heterozygous mutation. Our results provided further support for the association of biallelic SPTAN1 variants with HSP and suggested that screening for the SPTAN1 gene should be considered not only in patients with pure HSP but also in patients with complicated HSP.

[6] SPTAN1 encephalopathy: distinct phenotypes and genotypes
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:25631096 DOI:10.1038/jhg.2015.5 https://www.nature.com/articles/jhg20155
    snippet: by J Tohyama · 2015 · Cited by 95 — ... (SPTAN1 encephalopathy) in a dominant negative manner. The p.Q2202 ... As mentioned above, patients with SPTAN1 haploinsufficiency showed no ...
    abstract: Recent progress in genetic analysis reveals that a significant proportion of cryptogenic epileptic encephalopathies are single-gene disorders. Mutations in numerous genes for early-onset epileptic encephalopathies have been rapidly identified, including in SPTAN1, which encodes α-II spectrin. The aim of this review is to delineate SPTAN1 encephalopathy as a distinct clinical syndrome. To date, a total of seven epileptic patients with four different in-frame SPTAN1 mutations have been identified. The major clinical features of SPTAN1 mutations include epileptic encephalopathy with hypsarrhythmia, no visual attention, acquired microcephaly, spastic quadriplegia and severe intellectual disability. Brainstem and cerebellar atrophy and cerebral hypomyelination, as observed by magnetic resonance imaging, are specific hallmarks of this condition. A milder variant is characterized by generalized epilepsy with pontocerebellar atrophy. Only in-frame SPTAN1 mutations in the last two spectrin repeats in the C-terminal region lead to dominant negative effects and these specific phenotypes. The last two spectrin repeats are required for α/β spectrin heterodimer associations and the mutations can alter heterodimer formation between the two spectrins. From these data we suggest that SPTAN1 encephalopathy is a distinct clinical syndrome owing to specific SPTAN1 mutations. It is important that this syndrome is recognized by pediatric neurologists to enable proper diagnostic work-up for patients.

[7] Graphical representation of SPTAN1 with mutations ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Graphical-representation-of-SPTAN1-with-mutations-identified-in-epilepsy-and-HMN_fig2_334655241
    snippet: ... dominant-negative SPTAN1 ... Modeling human SPTAN1 encephalopathies in laboratory animals has been challenging partially because no haploinsufficiency ...

[8] SPTAN1 curation results for Dosage Sensitivity
    (authors not shown)
    https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/gene-dosage/HGNC:11273
    snippet: ... dominant-negative effect. In contrast, nonsense or frameshift mutations are seen more frequently in patients with HMND11, presumably due to haploinsufficiency.

[9] Genetic insights in hereditary neurological and neuromuscular disorders: spectrins bridge neurons to muscles
    J De Winter (2025)
    https://repository.uantwerpen.be/link/irua/214774
    snippet: … Genotype/phenotype correlations in AARS-related neuropathy in a … SPTAN1 and show a new type of early childhood onset nonprogressive distal myopathy. The emergence of SPTAN1 …

[10] Extending the clinical phenotype of SPTAN1: From DEE5 to migraine, epilepsy, and subependymal heterotopias without intellectual disability
    AV Marco Hernandez, A Caro… (2022)
    PMID:34590414 DOI:10.1002/AJMG.A.62507 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/AJMG.A.62507
    snippet: … genotype–phenotype correlation has been proposed according to the type and location of the mutation. Herein, we report three novel cases with de novo SPTAN1 … Dominantnegative …
    abstract: Mutations in SPTAN1 gene, encoding the nonerythrocyte αII-spectrin, are responsible for a severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE5) and a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders, as epilepsy with or without intellectual disability (ID) or ID with cerebellar syndrome. A certain genotype-phenotype correlation has been proposed according to the type and location of the mutation. Herein, we report three novel cases with de novo SPTAN1 mutations, one of them associated to a mild phenotype not previously described. They range from (1) severe developmental encephalopathy with ataxia and a mild cerebellar atrophy, without epilepsy; (2) moderate intellectual disability, severe language delay, ataxia and tremor; (3) normal intelligence, chronic migraine, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Remarkably, all these patients showed brain MRI abnormalities, being of special interest the subependymal heterotopias detected in the latter patient. Thus we extend the SPTAN1-related phenotypic spectrum, both in its radiological and clinical involvement. Furthermore, after systematic analysis of all the patients so far reported, we noted an excess of male versus female patients (20:9, p = 0.04), more pronounced among the milder phenotypes. Consequently, some protection factor might be suspected among female carriers, which if confirmed should be considered when establishing the pathogenicity of milder genetic variants in this gene.