SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … Here we describe 25 individuals with heterozygous, missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and phenotypes associated these variants with …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
    X Lu, K Ng, F Pinto e Vairo, J Collins, R Cohn… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01576-0
    snippet: … Nine de novo PTVs and 3 missense variants of MSL2 were described from these cohorts with … The genotype phenotype correlation in cases with MSL2 PTVs may be more complex and …
    abstract: Numerous large scale genomic studies have uncovered rare but recurrent pathogenetic variants in a significant number of genes encoding epigenetic machinery in cases with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) especially autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These findings provide strong support for the functional importance of epigenetic regulators in neurodevelopment. After the clinical genomics evaluation of the patients using exome sequencing, we have identified, three novel protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the MSL2 gene (OMIM: 614802) which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme. MSL2 modifies chromatin through both mono-ubiquitination of histone 2B on lysine 34 (K34) and acetylation of histone H4 on lysine 16 (K16). We reported first time the detailed clinical features associated with 3 MSL2 PTVs. There are 15 PTVs (13 de novo) reported from the large genomics studies (12 cases) or ClinVar (3 cases) of NDD, ASD, and developmental disorders (DD) but the specific clinical features for these cases are not described. Taken together, our descriptions of dysmorphic face and other features support the causal role of MSL2 in a likely syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder and add MSL2 to a growing list of epigenetic genes implicated in ASD.

[3] Targeted sequencing and integrative analysis to prioritize candidate genes in neurodevelopmental disorders
    Y Zhang, T Wang, Y Wang, K Xia, J Li, Z Sun (2021)
    DOI:10.1007/s12035-021-02377-y https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12035-021-02377-y
    snippet: … We highlighted MSL2, which carried two de novo protein-truncating … Multiple phenotype-genotype correlation studies have … variants (Dmis) were predicted by ReVe [37] and …
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a group of diseases characterized by high heterogeneity and frequently co-occurring symptoms. The mutational spectrum in patients with NDDs is largely incomplete. Here, we sequenced 547 genes from 1102 patients with NDDs and validated 1271 potential functional variants, including 108 de novo variants (DNVs) in 78 autosomal genes and seven inherited hemizygous variants in six X chromosomal genes. Notably, 36 of these 78 genes are the first to be reported in Chinese patients with NDDs. By integrating our genetic data with public data, we prioritized 212 NDD candidate genes with FDR < 0.1, including 17 novel genes. The novel candidate genes interacted or were co-expressed with known candidate genes, forming a functional network involved in known pathways. We highlighted MSL2, which carried two de novo protein-truncating variants (p.L192Vfs*3 and p.S486Ifs*11) and was frequently connected with known candidate genes. This study provides the mutational spectrum of NDDs in China and prioritizes 212 NDD candidate genes for further functional validation and genetic counseling.

[4] Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense-mediated decay uncovers candidate Mendelian diseases
    RI Torene, MJG Sacoto, F Millan, Z Zhang… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00402-0
    snippet: … Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 30 end of genes … Frameshift and missense variants in HDAC2 and MSL2 have … in individuals with NDD similar to the missense individuals. (B) …
    abstract: Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 3' end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent-offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one high-confidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease-associated genes and identify potentially novel disease-associated genes.

[5] The evolving landscape of functional models of autism spectrum disorder
    J Ranjan, A Bhattacharya (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4409/14/12/908
    snippet: … overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral … variants (SNVs), missense or protein truncating, as well as … MSL2 Biallelic expression of dosage sensitive genes, …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1-3% of the population globally. Owing to its multifactorial origin, complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to faithfully model ASD. In essence, ASD is an umbrella term for a group of individually rare disorders, each risk gene accounting for <1% of cases, threaded by a set of overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral tests are considered a gold standard for ASD diagnosis, and several animal models (rodents, pigs, and non-human primates) have traditionally been used to study its molecular basis. These models recapitulate the human phenotype to a varying degree and have been indispensable to preclinical research, but they cannot be used to study human-specific features such as protracted neuronal maturation and cell-intrinsic attributes, posing serious limitations to translatability. Human stem cell-based models, both as monolayer 2D cultures and 3D organoids and assembloids, can circumvent these limitations. Generated from a patient's own reprogrammed cells, these can be used for testing therapeutic interventions that are more condition and patient relevant, targeting developmental windows where the intervention would be most effective. We discuss some of these advancements by comparing traditional and recent models of ASD.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — Here we describe 25 individuals with heterozygous, missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and phenotypes ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:42168661 DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/MSL2-disruption-leads-to-autism-like-behaviors%2C-and-Luo-Qu/991181ed9eb7153d459aa4efba612ba18addddfa
    snippet: Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders ... phenotype ... missense variants may be associated ...
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are frequently associated with dysregulation of epigenetic mechanisms. Recent studies have implicated variants in components of the Male-Specific Lethal (MSL) complex, including MSL2, in NDD pathogenesis. However, the pathogenic mechanisms underlying MSL2-related neurodevelopmental disorders remain poorly defined. Here, we elucidate the role of MSL2 in neurodevelopment and NDDs through comprehensive analysis of conditional knockout mice and multi-omics profiling. Aggregation of published and unpublished genomic data and case series revealed that pathogenic variants in MSL complex components, including MSL2, presented with shared phenotypes. Using a nervous system-specific Msl2 conditional knockout mouse model, we demonstrate that Msl2 deficiency leads to impaired social novelty recognition, learning deficits, and spatial memory impairments. These behavioral abnormalities are characterized by disrupted neocortical lamination, compromised proliferation capacity and differentiative ability of neural progenitor cells, and reduced neuronal migration. Mechanistically, Msl2-deficient brains exhibit significantly reduced levels of histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac), particularly at promoter regions. Integrated RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and ATAC-seq analyses revealed widespread transcriptional downregulation and loss of chromatin accessibility at NDD-related genes. Variants in the MSL2 DNA-binding domain disrupted its ability to target key regulatory genes including FMR1, confirming direct epigenetic regulation. Together, these findings demonstrate that MSL2 promotes neurodevelopment primarily by maintaining chromatin accessibility through H4K16ac deposition, and its disruption underlies the molecular and behavioral hallmarks of NDDs.

[8] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … a novel neurodevelopmental syndrome of variable severity (Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental … We therefore classified this MSL2 variant as likely pathogenic (class 4) …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[9] Thickened Nuchal Translucency, Lymphangioma, and Ventriculomegaly: Prenatal Phenotypes for MSL2‐Related Disorders
    Q Xiang, J Wang, M Yang (2026)
    PMC13446537 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13446537/
    snippet: … between MSL2 gene and disease phenotype [1]. Additionally, it identified this variant as de novo in four patients diagnosed with MSL2‐associated neurodevelopmental syndrome (…

[10] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature.