SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … The X-linked gene DDX3X is a leading cause of developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD/ID) in females (MIM: 300958).Other NDD-associated DDX/DHX genes include …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[2] E3 ligases: a ubiquitous link between DNA repair, DNA replication and human disease
    AS Chauhan, SS Jhujh, GS Stewart (2024)
    PMID:38985307 DOI:10.1042/bcj20240124 https://portlandpress.com/biochemj/article/481/14/923/234688
    snippet: … the recruitment of the RNA helicase DHX9 to R-loop-prone … (XLID) represents a group of intellectual disability syndromes … , ID, growth retardation and dysmorphic facial features [104]. …
    abstract: Maintenance of genome stability is of paramount importance for the survival of an organism. However, genomic integrity is constantly being challenged by various endogenous and exogenous processes that damage DNA. Therefore, cells are heavily reliant on DNA repair pathways that have evolved to deal with every type of genotoxic insult that threatens to compromise genome stability. Notably, inherited mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in these protective pathways trigger the onset of disease that is driven by chromosome instability e.g. neurodevelopmental abnormalities, neurodegeneration, premature ageing, immunodeficiency and cancer development. The ability of cells to regulate the recruitment of specific DNA repair proteins to sites of DNA damage is extremely complex but is primarily mediated by protein post-translational modifications (PTMs). Ubiquitylation is one such PTM, which controls genome stability by regulating protein localisation, protein turnover, protein-protein interactions and intra-cellular signalling. Over the past two decades, numerous ubiquitin (Ub) E3 ligases have been identified to play a crucial role not only in the initiation of DNA replication and DNA damage repair but also in the efficient termination of these processes. In this review, we discuss our current understanding of how different Ub E3 ligases (RNF168, TRAIP, HUWE1, TRIP12, FANCL, BRCA1, RFWD3) function to regulate DNA repair and replication and the pathological consequences arising from inheriting deleterious mutations that compromise the Ub-dependent DNA damage response.

[3] Paralog studies augment gene discovery: DDX and DHX genes
    I Paine, JE Posey, CM Grochowski… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30226-5
    snippet: … might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease … , vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging …
    abstract: Members of a paralogous gene family in which variation in one gene is known to cause disease are eight times more likely to also be associated with human disease. Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in paralogous genes encoding members of the DExD/H-box RNA helicase superfamily might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease phenotypes. Here we describe 15 unrelated individuals who have DD and/or ID, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H-box RNA helicase genes. In addition, these individuals exhibit a variety of other tissue and organ system involvement including ocular, outer ear, hearing, cardiac, and kidney tissues. Five individuals with homozygous (one), compound-heterozygous (two), or de novo (two) missense variants in DHX37 were identified by exome sequencing. We identified ten total individuals with missense variants in three other DDX/DHX paralogs: DHX16 (four individuals), DDX54 (three individuals), and DHX34 (three individuals). Most identified variants are rare, predicted to be damaging, and occur at conserved amino acid residues. Taken together, these 15 individuals implicate the DExD/H-box helicases in both dominantly and recessively inherited neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlight the potential for more than one disease mechanism underlying these disorders.

[4] Bi-allelic UGGT1 variants cause a congenital disorder of glycosylation
    Z Dardas, L Harrold, DG Calame, CG Salter… (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00139-9
    snippet: … , intellectual disability, seizures, characteristic facial features, … half of the cohort include dysmorphic features, microcephaly (… in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) comprise a large heterogeneous group of metabolic conditions caused by defects in glycoprotein and glycolipid glycan assembly and remodeling, a fundamental molecular process with wide-ranging biological roles. Herein, we describe bi-allelic UGGT1 variants in fifteen individuals from ten unrelated families of various ethnic backgrounds as a cause of a distinctive CDG of variable severity. The cardinal clinical features of UGGT1-CDG involve developmental delay, intellectual disability, seizures, characteristic facial features, and microcephaly in the majority (9/11 affected individuals for whom measurements were available). The more severely affected individuals display congenital heart malformations, variable skeletal abnormalities including scoliosis, and hepatic and renal involvement, including polycystic kidneys mimicking autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. Clinical studies defined genotype-phenotype correlations, showing bi-allelic UGGT1 loss-of-function variants associated with increased disease severity, including death in infancy. UGGT1 encodes UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase 1, an enzyme critical for maintaining quality control of N-linked glycosylation. Molecular studies showed that pathogenic UGGT1 variants impair UGGT1 glucosylation and catalytic activity, disrupt mRNA splicing, or inhibit endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention. Collectively, our data provide a comprehensive genetic, clinical, and molecular characterization of UGGT1-CDG, broadening the spectrum of N-linked glycosylation disorders.

[5] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … disorder with intellectual disability, developmental delay, motor … We also obtained facial photos of individuals 4 (c.511C>T [p.… DHX9 is used as the loading control. Immunoblotting on …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[6] Intellectual disability (Version 11.31)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/285/
    snippet: DHX9. 2 reviews. 2 green, MONOALLELIC, autosomal or pseudoautosomal ... Autism and epilepsy, severe intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial features.

[7] Rare De Novo Missense Variants in RNA Helicase DDX6 Cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:31422817 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.07.010 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Rare-De-Novo-Missense-Variants-in-RNA-Helicase-DDX6-Balak-Benard/2f96fcd2652cb352a456ae6156ce6b1c1935ccae
    snippet: DHX9 is established as a critical regulator of ... intellectual disability · D. WeilA. PitonD ... intellectual disability, and dysmorphic facial features.
    abstract: The human RNA helicase DDX6 is an essential component of membrane-less organelles called processing bodies (PBs). PBs are involved in mRNA metabolic processes including translational repression via coordinated storage of mRNAs. Previous studies in human cell lines have implicated altered DDX6 in molecular and cellular dysfunction, but clinical consequences and pathogenesis in humans have yet to be described. Here, we report the identification of five rare de novo missense variants in DDX6 in probands presenting with intellectual disability, developmental delay, and similar dysmorphic features including telecanthus, epicanthus, arched eyebrows, and low-set ears. All five missense variants (p.His372Arg, p.Arg373Gln, p.Cys390Arg, p.Thr391Ile, and p.Thr391Pro) are located in two conserved motifs of the RecA-2 domain of DDX6 involved in RNA binding, helicase activity, and protein-partner binding. We use functional studies to demonstrate that the first variants identified (p.Arg373Gln and p.Cys390Arg) cause significant defects in PB assembly in primary fibroblast and model human cell lines. These variants' interactions with several protein partners were also disrupted in immunoprecipitation assays. Further investigation via complementation assays included the additional variants p.Thr391Ile and p.Thr391Pro, both of which, similarly to p.Arg373Gln and p.Cys390Arg, demonstrated significant defects in P-body assembly. Complementing these molecular findings, modeling of the variants on solved protein structures showed distinct spatial clustering near known protein binding regions. Collectively, our clinical and molecular data describe a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with pathogenic missense variants in DDX6. Additionally, we suggest DDX6 join the DExD/H-box genes DDX3X and DHX30 in an emerging class of neurodevelopmental disorders involving RNA helicases.

[8] Monoallelic variation in DHX9 , the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369072477_Monoallelic_variation_in_DHX9_the_gene_encoding_the_DExH-box_helicase_DHX9_underlies_neurodevelopment_disorders_and_Charcot-Marie-Tooth_disease
    snippet: ... DHX9 ... Rare De Novo Missense Variants in RNA Helicase DDX6 Cause Intellectual Disability and Dysmorphic Features and Lead to P-Body Defects and ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[9] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest … for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder. …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[10] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin … genomics databases such as OMIM, ClinGen, and GenCC. … in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.