SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … Furthermore, the patient had dysmorphic features consisting of low-set ears, hypertelorism, … variants of DHX9 lead to neurodevelopmental disorder. The high pLI score of DHX9 (ie 1.0) …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … ogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a … Although neither a consistent facial gestalt nor a recognizable pattern of human malfor…
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … associated with a primary neurodevelopmental disorder. In more … with impaired language and dysmorphic facies [IDDILF, … Although, OMIM still does not list DHX9 as associated with …

[4] The epilepsy–autism phenotype associated with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies: New mechanism‐based therapeutic options
    N Specchio, V Di Micco, E Aronica, S Auvin… (2025)
    PMID:39985505 DOI:10.1111/epi.18209 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/epi.18209
    snippet: … A syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by … A neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by corpus … pathogenic DHX9 variants cause abnormal DHX9 cellular …
    abstract: Epilepsy and autism often co-occur in genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs), but their underlying neurobiological processes remain poorly understood, complicating treatment. Advances in molecular genetics and understanding the neurodevelopmental pathogenesis of the epilepsy-autism phenotype may lead to mechanism-based treatments for children with DEEs and autism. Several genes, including the newly reported PPFIA3, MYCBP2, DHX9, TMEM63B, and RELN, are linked to various neurodevelopmental and epileptic disorders, intellectual disabilities, and autistic features. These findings underscore the clinical heterogeneity of genetic DEEs and suggest diverse neurobiological mechanisms influenced by genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. Mechanisms linking epilepsy and autism include γ-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) signaling dysregulation, synaptic plasticity, disrupted functional connectivity, and neuroinflammatory responses. GABA system abnormalities, critical for inhibitory neurotransmission, contribute to both conditions. Dysregulation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and neuroinflammation are also pivotal, affecting seizure generation, drug resistance, and neuropsychiatric comorbidities. Abnormal synaptic function and connectivity further underscore the epilepsy-autism phenotype. New treatment options targeting specific mechanisms linked to the epilepsy-autism phenotype are emerging. Genetic variants in potassium channel genes like KCNQ2 and KCNT1 are frequent causes of early onset DEEs. Personalized treatments like retigabine and quinidine have been explored with heterogeneous responses. Efforts are ongoing to develop more effective KCNQ activators and KCNT1 blockers. SCN1A genetic variants, particularly in Dravet syndrome, show potential for treatment of autistic symptoms with low-dose clonazepam, fenfluramine, and cannabidiol, although human trials have yet to consistently replicate animal model successes. Early intervention before the age of 3 years, particularly in SCN1A- and tuberous sclerosis complex-related DEEs, is crucial. Additionally, targeting the mTOR pathway shows promise for seizure control and managing epilepsy-associated comorbidities. Understanding the distinct autism spectrum disorder phenotype in DEEs and implementing early behavioral interventions are essential for improving outcomes. Despite genetic advances, significant challenges persist in diagnosing and treating DEE-associated epi

[5] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    PMID:39828505 DOI:10.1016/j.tig.2024.12.006 https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 variants is also beginning to emerge [… Figure 3 Neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD)-associated missense variants can affect …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37467750 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.013 PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — Other common clinically observed features included axial hypotonia (7/14) and dysmorphic features (8/14). Although neither a consistent facial ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text
    snippet: ... neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 ... Other common features included axial hypotonia (7/14) and dysmorphic facial ...

[8] Gene: DHX9 -
    (authors not shown)
    https://gene.sfari.org/database/human-gene/DHX9
    snippet: Yamada et al., 2023 demonstrated that two de novo missense variants in the DHX9 gene (a p. ... neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by ... dysmorphic features, ...

[9] Intellectual Developmental Disorder, Autosomal Dominant 75
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/intellectual_developmental_disorder_autosomal_dominant_75
    snippet: ... neurodevelopmental disorder with material basis in heterozygous mutation in DHX9 on chromosome 1q25. ... dysmorphic facial features, nonspecific. Head And Neck - ...

[10] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37369308 DOI:10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104804 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Heterozygous-loss-of-function-DHX9-variants-are-and-Yamada-Nitta/ce5544f59e9fd5623fe162613ad02f1c3187be60
    snippet: ... DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder ... dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.