SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Integrated analysis of the molecular pathogenesis of FDXR-associated disease
    JD Slone, L Yang, Y Peng, LF Queme, B Harris… (2020)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41419-020-2637-3
    snippet: … The results demonstrated that both ocular photoreceptor rods and … S1B), which may further compound the optic atrophy that we … b Electroretinography was performed in 4-month-old Fdxr …
    abstract: The mitochondrial flavoprotein ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) is required for biogenesis of iron-sulfur clusters and for steroidogenesis. Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are ubiquitous cofactors essential to various cellular processes, and an increasing number of disorders are associated with disruptions in the synthesis of Fe-S clusters. Our previous studies have demonstrated that hypomorphic mutations in FDXR cause a novel mitochondriopathy and optic atrophy in humans and mice, attributed in part to reduced function of the electron transport chain (ETC) as well as elevated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Inflammation and peripheral neuropathy are also hallmarks of this disease. In this paper, we demonstrate that FDXR mutation leads to significant optic transport defects that are likely to underlie optic atrophy, a major clinical presentation in FDXR patients, as well as a neurodegenerative loss of cells in the central nervous system (CNS). Molecular analysis indicates that FDXR mutation also leads to mitochondrial iron overload and an associated depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane, further supporting the hypothesis that FDXR mutations cause neurodegeneration by affecting FDXR's critical role in iron homeostasis.

[2] Expanding the FDXR-associated disease phenotype: retinal dystrophy is a recurrent ocular feature
    N Jurkute, PD Shanmugarajah… (2021)
    https://jov.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?articleid=2772552
    snippet: … to drive the pathogenesis of optic atrophy, retinal degeneration, … In the oldest child, pattern and full-field electroretinography (… Thus, the retinal dystrophy and photoreceptor loss in this …

[3] FDXR-Associated Oculopathy: Congenital Amaurosis and Early-Onset Severe Retinal Dystrophy as Common Presenting Features in a Chinese Population
    S Yi, Y Zheng, Z Yi, Y Wang, Y Jiang, J Ouyang, S Li… (2023)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/14/4/952
    snippet: … tomography (OCT), and electroretinography (ERG). Eight … rather than an original photoreceptor dysfunction leads to the … in Fdxr showed significant improvement in optic atrophy, …
    abstract: Variants in <i>FDXR</i> reportedly cause autosomal recessive auditory neuropathy and optic atrophy, expanding to retinal dystrophy. This study aimed to further clarify associated phenotypes. <i>FDXR</i> variants were selected from our in-house whole-exome sequencing dataset of 6397 families with different eye conditions. The clinical data of the identified patients were summarized. Biallelic pathogenic or likely pathogenic <i>FDXR</i> variants were identified in 11 unrelated patients, including 14 missense variants of which 10 were novel. Fundus observation showed complete optic disc pallor, silver wiring or severe attenuation of retinal vessels, and varying degrees of generalized retinal degeneration. Before the detection of <i>FDXR</i> variants, four patients were clinically diagnosed as congenital amaurosis due to the presence of nystagmus a few months after birth, while seven were diagnosed as early-onset severe retinal dystrophy due to the presence of nyctalopia and/or poor vision in early childhood. Biallelic <i>FDXR</i> variants are a frequent cause of congenital or early-onset severe retinal dystrophy, especially for patients with severe optic atrophy and retinal dystrophy in early childhood.

[4] Clinical and genetic landscape of optic atrophy in 826 families: insights from 50 nuclear genes
    Y Zheng, P Wang, S Li, Y Long, Y Jiang, D Guo, X Jia… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/5/1604/7826698
    snippet: … The carriers of OPA3, RTN4IP1, FDXR and C12orf65 mutations … observed in our in-house patients carrying FDXR mutations. … with or without electroretinography data. Of the 29 patients, …
    abstract: Hereditary optic neuropathies (HON) comprise a group of diseases caused by genetic defects in either the mitochondrial or nuclear genomes. The increasing availability of genetic testing has expanded the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of HON more broadly than previously recognized. The genetic and phenotypic landscape of HON is attributed to 50 nuclear genes, so we genetically analysed patients with suspected HON from a group of 4776 index cases following our previous study on 1516 probands with Leber's HON (LHON) who had mitochondrial DNA variants. Exome sequencing was performed in 473 probands diagnosed with nuclear gene-related HON (nHON) and 353 cases with unsolved LHON. Sequencing and variant interpretation of the 50 nuclear genes indicated that the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing for nHON was 31.50% (149/473), while it was markedly lower [1.42% (5/353)] for LHON patients without primary mtDNA mutations. The top five genes implicated in nHON in our in-house cohort were OPA1, WFS1, FDXR, ACO2 and AFG3L2, which accounted for 82.46% of probands. Although OPA1 was the most prevalent nHON-causative gene in both our cohort (53.25%) and a literature review (37.09%), the predominance of OPA1, WFS1 and FDXR differed significantly between our in-house cohort and the literature review (P-adjusted < 0.001). Fundus changes in nHON could be stratified into three categories: the most common was optic atrophy at examination (78.79%); the rarest was LHON-like optic atrophy (3.64%); and optic atrophy with concurrent retinal degeneration (17.57%), an independent risk factor for visual prognosis in nHON, occurred at an intermediate frequency. A systematic genotype-phenotype analysis highlighted different genetic contributions for ocular, extraocular neurological and extraocular non-neurological phenotypes. In addition, systemic variant analysis at the individual gene level suggested a revised interpretation of the pathogenicity of a WFS1 heterozygous truncation variant. This study provides a panoramic view of the genetic and phenotypic profiles of HON in a real-world study and the literature. The categories of nHON fundus phenotypes will benefit future studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying HON and targeted therapies. In addition to routine ophthalmic examinations, careful examination of extraocular symptoms and meaningful genetic counselling are warranted for patients with nHON.

[5] Electrodiagnostic tests of the visual pathway and applications in neuro-ophthalmology
    A Calcagni, MM Neveu, N Jurkute, AG Robson (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41433-024-03154-6
    snippet: … hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy. The value of … cell activity with a small cone photoreceptor contribution, and the b-… FDXR-associated disease is a phenotypically …
    abstract: This article describes the main visual electrodiagnostic tests relevant to neuro-ophthalmology practice, including the visual evoked potential (VEP), and the full-field, pattern and multifocal electroretinograms (ffERG; PERG; mfERG). The principles of electrophysiological interpretation are illustrated with reference to acquired and inherited optic neuropathies, and retinal disorders that may masquerade as optic neuropathy, including ffERG and PERG findings in cone and macular dystrophies, paraneoplastic and vascular retinopathies. Complementary VEP and PERG recordings are illustrated in demyelinating, ischaemic, nutritional (B12), and toxic (mercury, cobalt, and ethambutol-related) optic neuropathies and inherited disorders affecting mitochondrial function such as Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy. The value of comprehensive electrophysiological phenotyping in syndromic diseases is highlighted in cases of SSBP1-related disease and ROSAH (Retinal dystrophy, Optic nerve oedema, Splenomegaly, Anhidrosis and Headache). The review highlights the value of different electrophysiological techniques, for the purposes of differential diagnosis and objective functional phenotyping.

[6] FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort: Unraveling expanded ocular phenotypes and genetic spectrum
    X Wei, H Li, T Zhu, F Yao, R Sui (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001448352300221X
    snippet: … optic atrophy and diverse extraocular manifestations, all patients presented with retinal dystrophy, and electroretinogram showed severely impaired cone and rod … ERG recordings of all …
    abstract: FDXR: associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. This study evaluated the ocular phenotypes and genetic features of patients with biallelic FDXR variants. Five individuals from unrelated non-consanguineous Chinese families with biallelic FDXR variants were identified using whole exome sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and co-segregation validation. In addition to optic atrophy and diverse extraocular manifestations, all patients presented with retinal dystrophy, and electroretinogram showed severely impaired cone and rod functions in their first decades. Three of the five patients showed attenuated retinal vessels that appeared as white lines on the fundus, and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) further revealed vascular abnormalities including delayed filling, completely occluded retinal vasculature, and severe retinal vascular nonperfusion of the peripheral retina. Five novel FDXR variants were identified: c.383C > T (p.A128V), c.963delG (p.R322fs*7), c.1052_1053delTC (p.L351Pfs*12), c.394-11T > G and c.1002+1G > A. Retinal dystrophy with attenuated retinal vessels appearing as white lines was observed in this cohort, and the FFA images revealed that retinal vascular occlusion could be a distinct clinical characteristic of FDXR-associated disease. Probands with FDXR revealed severe early onset ophthalmic features with rapid-progression, indicating the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, this is the first study to report FFA manifestations in an FDXR cohort, expanding the FDXR-associated ocular disease phenotype and genetic spectrum.

[7] The electroretinogram in the genomics era: outer retinal ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34234290 DOI:10.1038/s41433-021-01659-y PMC8377088 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8377088/
    snippet: by EE Cornish · 2021 · Cited by 59 — Full-field ERG testing can help differentiate different types of photoreceptor dystrophies (rod–cone or cone–rod) and direct clinical geneticists
    abstract: The inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) have traditionally been described phenotypically with the description evolving to incorporate more sophisticated structural and functional assessments. In the last 25 years there has been considerable advances in the understanding of underlying genetic aetiologies. The role of the ophthalmologist is now to work in a multi-disciplinary team to identify the disease-causing genotype, which might be amenable to gene-directed intervention. Visual electrophysiology is an important tool to assist the ophthalmologist in guiding the clinical geneticist to reach a final molecular diagnosis. This review outlines the physiological basis for the ISCEV standard electrophysiology tests, the role of electrophysiology in localising the functional deficit, correlation with structural findings to guide diagnosis and finally management of IRDs in the era of genomics with emphasis on the outer retina.

[8] Photoreceptor Manifestations of Primary Mitochondrial Optic ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:35506936 DOI:10.1167/iovs.63.5.5 https://iovs.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?articleid=2778802
    snippet: by YH Chang · 2022 · Cited by 13 — As for differences between cone and rod involvement in primary mitochondrial optic neuropathies, our ERG findings showed a more obvious decrease in rod ...
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>To compare the manifestations of photoreceptors (PRs) in three hereditary optic neuropathies affected by primary mitochondrial dysfunction and discuss whether the retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) or the PRs are preferentially affected.<h4>Methods</h4>A retrospective analysis of patients with genetically confirmed diagnoses of optic neuropathies associated with mitochondrial dysfunction was performed. This cohort included Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), autosomal dominant optic atrophy type 1 (OPA1), and optic atrophy type 13 (OPA13). Patient chart evaluations included clinical characteristics, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), fundus photography, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), electroretinogram (ERG), and visual evoked potential data.<h4>Results</h4>This analysis included seven patients with LHON, six with OPA1, and one with OPA13 from a tertiary medical center. Thirteen of the 14 individuals were male. The average BCVA at diagnosis was 20/285 and 20/500 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Five of the seven patients with LHON, and three of the six patients with OPA1 also showed a mild amplitude reduction or delayed latency on light-adapted ERG and 30-Hz flicker responses; however, SD-OCT imaging did not show correlated PR abnormalities. Notably, a 7-year follow-up of a patient with OPA13 revealed degeneration of RGCs prior to the degeneration of PRs. Follow-up data also demonstrated continuous loss of cone outer segment tips on SD-OCT imaging.<h4>Conclusions</h4>RGCs are, in general, affected by mitochondrial dysfunction, whereas variable PR dysfunction exists in patients with LHON and OPA1, especially with respect to the cone responses. Involvement of PRs is particularly evident in OPA13 after RGC degenerations.

[9] Electroretinogram
    (authors not shown)
    https://eyewiki.org/Electroretinogram
    snippet: The electroretinogram (ERG) is a diagnostic test that measures the electrical activity of the retina in response to a light stimulus.

[10] Cone Dystrophy, Macular Degeneration or Optic Nerve ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://consultqd.clevelandclinic.org/cone-dystrophy-macular-degeneration-or-optic-nerve-disorder-visual-electrophysiology-helps-make-the-diagnosis
    snippet: “The ERG measures activity of the retina. The VEP measures activity of the optic nerve. Different variations and combinations of tests help us ...