SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … in walk acquisition, and similar dysmorphic features including a highbossing … DHX9 as associated with human disease, two very recent studies identified pathogenic variants in DHX9 …

[2] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … biallelic variants in EIF4A3 lead to a craniofacial disorder associated with limb defects that can … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 variants is also beginning to …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[3] Bi-allelic UGGT1 variants cause a congenital disorder of glycosylation
    Z Dardas, L Harrold, DG Calame, CG Salter… (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00139-9
    snippet: … , limb hypertonia, craniofacial dysmorphism with coarse features, clenched hands with … Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies …
    abstract: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) comprise a large heterogeneous group of metabolic conditions caused by defects in glycoprotein and glycolipid glycan assembly and remodeling, a fundamental molecular process with wide-ranging biological roles. Herein, we describe bi-allelic UGGT1 variants in fifteen individuals from ten unrelated families of various ethnic backgrounds as a cause of a distinctive CDG of variable severity. The cardinal clinical features of UGGT1-CDG involve developmental delay, intellectual disability, seizures, characteristic facial features, and microcephaly in the majority (9/11 affected individuals for whom measurements were available). The more severely affected individuals display congenital heart malformations, variable skeletal abnormalities including scoliosis, and hepatic and renal involvement, including polycystic kidneys mimicking autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. Clinical studies defined genotype-phenotype correlations, showing bi-allelic UGGT1 loss-of-function variants associated with increased disease severity, including death in infancy. UGGT1 encodes UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase 1, an enzyme critical for maintaining quality control of N-linked glycosylation. Molecular studies showed that pathogenic UGGT1 variants impair UGGT1 glucosylation and catalytic activity, disrupt mRNA splicing, or inhibit endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention. Collectively, our data provide a comprehensive genetic, clinical, and molecular characterization of UGGT1-CDG, broadening the spectrum of N-linked glycosylation disorders.

[4] Biallelic variation in the choline and ethanolamine transporter FLVCR1 underlies a pleiotropic disease spectrum from adult neurodegeneration to severe …
    DG Calame, JH Wong, P Panda, DT Nguyen… (2024)
    PMC10888986 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10888986/
    snippet: … The severe anemia and craniofacial, limb and digital malformations in Flvcr1 knockout 163 … Individuals 9-11 in Family 8 were stillborn and exhibited craniofacial, limb, 243 …

[5] JAMES LUPSKI
    J LUPSKI
    https://profiles.viictr.org/profile/268099
    snippet: … Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2023 08 …

[6] "Monoallelic Variation In Dhx9, The Gene Encoding The Dexh ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37467750 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.013 https://digitalcommons.library.tmc.edu/uthmed_docs/1407/
    snippet: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] "Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/papers/5344/
    snippet: Calame DG, Guo T, Wang C, et al. Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[8] A wide spectrum of human neurological diseases linked to ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://blogs.bcm.edu/2023/07/25/from-the-labs-a-wide-spectrum-of-human-neurological-diseases-linked-to-variations-of-one-gene-dhx9/
    snippet: This study shows that gene DHX9 is involved in regulating mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal well-being.

[9] Daniel Calame | BCM
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.bcm.edu/people-search/daniel-calame-18985
    snippet: Daniel G Calame, Tianyu Guo , Chen Wang, et al.. " Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease " Am J Hum Genet. 2023 Aug 3; 110 (8) : 1394-1413.

[10] Entry - #620988 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ... - OMIM
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.omim.org/entry/620988
    snippet: Additional more variable features may include hypotonia, seizures, nonspecific dysmorphic features, poor overall growth with small head circumference, abnormal brain imaging, and heart disease (Calame et al., 2023).