SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … , or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating … predicted to undergo nonsense-mediated decay and therefore … phenotypes of MSL2 variants, we have derived MSL2 …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
    X Lu, K Ng, F Pinto e Vairo, J Collins, R Cohn… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01576-0
    snippet: … exon in patient 3 is predicted to result in complete loss of function of … are characterized as nonsense-mediated decay escaping … The genotype phenotype correlation in cases with MSL2 …
    abstract: Numerous large scale genomic studies have uncovered rare but recurrent pathogenetic variants in a significant number of genes encoding epigenetic machinery in cases with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) especially autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These findings provide strong support for the functional importance of epigenetic regulators in neurodevelopment. After the clinical genomics evaluation of the patients using exome sequencing, we have identified, three novel protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the MSL2 gene (OMIM: 614802) which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme. MSL2 modifies chromatin through both mono-ubiquitination of histone 2B on lysine 34 (K34) and acetylation of histone H4 on lysine 16 (K16). We reported first time the detailed clinical features associated with 3 MSL2 PTVs. There are 15 PTVs (13 de novo) reported from the large genomics studies (12 cases) or ClinVar (3 cases) of NDD, ASD, and developmental disorders (DD) but the specific clinical features for these cases are not described. Taken together, our descriptions of dysmorphic face and other features support the causal role of MSL2 in a likely syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder and add MSL2 to a growing list of epigenetic genes implicated in ASD.

[3] Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense-mediated decay uncovers candidate Mendelian diseases
    RI Torene, MJG Sacoto, F Millan, Z Zhang… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00402-0
    snippet: … -truncating variants escaping nonsense-mediated decay (… Trios with at least one NDD phenotype in the proband were … (eg, MSL2) have more sampling of the phenotypic spectrum; …
    abstract: Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 3' end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent-offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one high-confidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease-associated genes and identify potentially novel disease-associated genes.

[4] Comparative genome analysis of test algal strain NIVA-CHL1 (Raphidocelis subcapitata) maintained in microalgal culture collections worldwide
    T Yamagishi, H Yamaguchi, S Suzuki, M Yoshikawa… (2020)
    PMID:33166324 DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0241889 https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0241889
    snippet: … into 4 classes according to potential phenotypes: impact HIGH, … , resulting in loss of function or nonsense-mediated decay; thus, … , these authors demonstrated that MSL2 and MSL3 are …
    abstract: Raphidocelis subcapitata is one of the most frequently used species for algal growth inhibition tests. Accordingly, many microalgal culture collections worldwide maintain R. subcapitata for distribution to users. All R. subcapitata strains maintained in these collections are derived from the same cultured strain, NIVA-CHL1. However, considering that 61 years have passed since this strain was isolated, we suspected that NIVA-CHL1 in culture collections might have acquired various mutations. In this study, we compared the genome sequences among NIVA-CHL1 from 8 microalgal culture collections and one laboratory in Japan to evaluate the presence of mutations. We found single-nucleotide polymorphisms or indels at 19,576 to 28,212 sites per strain in comparison with the genome sequence of R. subcapitata NIES-35, maintained at the National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. These mutations were detected not only in non-coding but also in coding regions; some of the latter mutations may affect protein function. In growth inhibition test with 3,5-dichlorophenol, EC50 values varied 2.6-fold among the 9 strains. In the ATCC 22662-2 and CCAP 278/4 strains, we also detected a mutation in the gene encoding small-conductance mechanosensitive ion channel, which may lead to protein truncation and loss of function. Growth inhibition test with sodium chloride suggested that osmotic regulation has changed in ATCC 22662-2 and CCAP 278/4 in comparison with NIES-35.

[5] Defective splicing, disease and therapy: searching for master checkpoints in exon definition
    E Buratti, M Baralle, FE Baralle (2006)
    PMID:16855287 DOI:10.1093/nar/gkl498 https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-abstract/34/12/3494/2375666
    snippet: … of the P element and Msl2 transcripts in Drosophila ( 94 , 95 ) … a long QT syndrome (LQT2 phenotype) in an individual which … rapid degradation by the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) …
    abstract: The number of aberrant splicing processes causing human disease is growing exponentially and many recent studies have uncovered some aspects of the unexpectedly complex network of interactions involved in these dysfunctions. As a consequence, our knowledge of the various cis- and trans-acting factors playing a role on both normal and aberrant splicing pathways has been enhanced greatly. However, the resulting information explosion has also uncovered the fact that many splicing systems are not easy to model. In fact we are still unable, with certainty, to predict the outcome of a given genomic variation. Nonetheless, in the midst of all this complexity some hard won lessons have been learned and in this survey we will focus on the importance of the wide sequence context when trying to understand why apparently similar mutations can give rise to different effects. The examples discussed in this summary will highlight the fine 'balance of power' that is often present between all the various regulatory elements that define exon boundaries. In the final part, we shall then discuss possible therapeutic targets and strategies to rescue genetic defects of complex splicing systems.

[6] Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense-mediated ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38091987 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.11.007 PMC10806863 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10806863/
    snippet: by RI Torene · 2023 · Cited by 47 — Genes with more PTVesc individuals (e.g., MSL2) have more sampling of the phenotypic spectrum; however, this heatmap should not be interpreted ...
    abstract: Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 3' end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent-offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one high-confidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease-associated genes and identify potentially novel disease-associated genes.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929724001642
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — ... nonsense-mediated decay and therefore likely to exhibit reduced MSL2 levels (p.Pro36Alafs∗36 and p.Arg39Leufs∗34) led to a more severe ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Entry - *614802 - MSL COMPLEX SUBUNIT 2; MSL2
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/614802
    snippet: MSL2 is a subunit of a protein complex that functions in chromatin modification. The complex has a major role both in acetylation of histone H4 (see 602822) ...

[9] (PDF) Defining the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of X ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345847438_Defining_the_genotypic_and_phenotypic_spectrum_of_X-linked_MSL3-related_disorder
    snippet: modulator in flies and mammals. 1–4. In mammalian species, the. core MSL complex consists of MSL1, MSL2, MSL3, and MOF ... nonsense-mediated decay ...

[10] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an … It is predicted to affect the canonical splice donor site in exon 1. We … to a non-functional truncated protein, compatible with the …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.