SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Case report: Characterization of a patient with novel biallelic variants in GTF3C3 and comprehensive review of previously reported cases
    L López (2026)
    DOI:10.3389/fgene.2026.1860633/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/genetics/articles/10.3389/fgene.2026.1860633/full
    snippet: … clinical features include epilepsy, global … GTF3C3 in the differential diagnosis of syndromic NDDs, particularly in patients presenting with central nervous system malformations, seizures …

[2] Heterogeneity in biomarkers, mitogenome and genetic disorders of the Arab population with special emphasis on large-scale whole-exome sequencing
    JF Borgio (2021)
    PMID:37313193 DOI:10.5114/aoms/145370 PMC10259412 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10259412/
    snippet: More than 25 million DNA variations have been discovered as novel including major alleles from the Arab population. Exome studies on the Saudi genome discovered > 3000 novel …
    abstract: More than 25 million DNA variations have been discovered as novel including major alleles from the Arab population. Exome studies on the Saudi genome discovered > 3000 novel nucleotide variants associated with > 1200 rare genetic disorders. Reclassification of many pathogenic variants in the Human Gene Mutation Database and ClinVar Database as benign through the Arab database facilitates building a detailed and comprehensive map of the human morbid genome. Intellectual disability comes first with the combined and observed carrier frequency of 0.06779 among Saudi Arabians; retinal dystrophy is the next highest. Genome studies have discovered interesting novel candidate disease marker variations in many genes from consanguineous families. More than 7 pathogenic variants in the <i>C12orf57</i> gene are prominently associated with the etiology of developmental delay/intellectual impairment in Arab ancestries. Advances in large-scale genome studies open a new outlook on Mendelian genes and disorders. In the past half-dozen years, candidate genes of intellectual disability, neurogenetic disorders, blood and bleeding disorders and rare genetic diseases have been well documented through genomic medicine studies in combination with advanced computational biology applications. The Arab mitogenome exposed hundreds of variations in the mtDNA genome and ancestral sharing with Africa, the Near East and East Asia and its association with obesity. These recent discoveries in disease markers and molecular genetics of the Arab population will have a positive impact towards supporting genetic counsellors on reaching consanguineous families to manage stress linked to genetics and precision medicine. This narrative review summarizes the advances in molecular medical genetics and recent discoveries on pathogenic variants. Despite the fact that these initiatives are targeting the genetics and genomics of disorders prevalent in Arab populations, a lack of complete cooperation across the projects needed to be revisited to uncover the Arab population's prominent disease markers. This shows that further study is needed in genomics to fully comprehend the molecular abnormalities and associated pathogenesis that cause inherited disorders in Arab ancestries.

[3] White matter disorders at the intersection of transcription, RNA processing and translation
    A Chapleau, F Villa Tobón, G Bernard (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41582-026-01248-1
    snippet: … transcription factor required for Pol III recruitment, cause cerebellofaciodental syndrome45,46, whereas variants in genes encoding subunits of the TFIIIC complex (GTF3C5and GTF3C3)…
    abstract: Hereditary white matter disorders, encompassing leukodystrophies and genetically determined leukoencephalopathies, are a heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by white matter signal abnormalities on neuroimaging. An increasing number of these disorders are now associated with defects in genes that encode proteins involved in transcription, RNA processing and translation. Pathogenic variants in these genes disrupt fundamental processes of the central dogma yet manifest primarily as neurological diseases, often presenting with diverse clinical and radiological features. Although many of these conditions have been recognized for over a decade, their underlying pathophysiological mechanisms and the selective vulnerability of the CNS and myelin remain incompletely understood. Here we provide a comprehensive overview of white matter disorders arising from defects in protein biosynthesis pathways. We summarize known disease-causing genes and their molecular consequences and associated clinical and radiological phenotypes, and highlight emerging mechanistic themes and therapeutic strategies across this expanding class of disorders.

[4] Pathogenic variants in BORCS5 cause a spectrum of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders with lysosomal dysfunction
    NE Mencacci, G Minakaki, R Maroofian… (2026)
    https://www.jci.org/articles/view/195336
    snippet: BORCS5 encodes a subunit of the BLOC-One-Related Complex (BORC), which is known to promote anterograde movement and fusion of lysosomes. We identified 16 individuals from …
    abstract: BORCS5 encodes a subunit of the BLOC-One-Related Complex (BORC), which is known to promote anterograde movement and fusion of lysosomes. We identified 16 individuals from 9 families with bi-allelic BORCS5 variants, revealing a spectrum of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative phenotypes. Carriers of homozygous protein-truncating variants (PTVs), resulting in complete loss of BORCS5, presented with prenatally lethal arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, brain malformations, and neuropathological evidence of neuroaxonal dystrophy. Individuals with missense or splice-site variants presented differently, with microcephaly, developmental epileptic encephalopathy, optic atrophy, spasticity, and progressive movement disorders. In this group, brain MRI showed diffuse hypomyelination, corpus callosum abnormalities, and progressive global cerebral atrophy, consistent with neurodegeneration. Borcs5 KO in zebrafish resulted in microcephaly, motor deficits, and increased seizure susceptibility, mirroring the patients' clinical presentation. At the cellular level, only BORCS5 PTVs, but not missense variants, led to perinuclear lysosomal clustering and impaired lysosomal axonal trafficking in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived forebrain neurons. However, PTVs and missense variants were associated with reduced lysosomal proteolysis and activity of lysosomal hydrolases glucocerebrosidase and cathepsin B, indicating lysosomal dysfunction. Our study reveals a role for BORCS5 in modulation of lysosomal function, in addition to its known role in lysosome movement and fusion, possibly underlying the diverse clinical manifestations in individuals with BORCS5-related disorders.

[5] OCLN (Early onset or syndromic epilepsy) - Gene
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/402/gene/OCLN/
    snippet: GTF3C3 5 ... Abdel-Hamid et al, 2017 - 13 new patients from 10 ... Comment when marking as ready: Sufficient cases with variants in OCLN and seizures reported.

[6] Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the TFIIIC2 complex are associated with neurodevelopmental phenotypes in humans and zebrafish
    MS Abdel (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/7/1/fcaf055/8002734
    snippet: … Quantification of swimming distance with PTZ treatment normalized to fish without treatment showed that gtf3c3 F0 KO (n = 50) larvae exhibited seizure-like behaviour after 15 min of …
    abstract: RNA polymerase III transcribes essential non-coding RNAs, a process regulated by transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC. Although germline variants in TFIIIC subunit genes have been described in a few patients with neurodevelopmental disorders, the associated pathogenesis and clinical spectrum are not yet well defined. Herein, we describe the identification of biallelic variants in <i>GTF3C3,</i> which encodes a key component of the TFIIIC subunit, in four patients from three unrelated families of different ethnicities collected through GeneMatcher. The patients exhibited microcephaly, developmental delay, intellectual disability and distinctive dysmorphic facies that appear recognizable in very young children. Their brain imaging showed brain atrophy with predominant cerebellar involvement, as well as hypoplasia of the frontal lobes and one patient had moderate to severe simplified gyral pattern. Seizures were observed in half of the patients. Exome/genome sequencing revealed four different <i>GTF3C3</i> variants including three missense (p.Cys172Gly, p.Val427Phe and p.Ala509Thr) and one nonsense variant (p.Arg717Ter). Missense variants were not present in known genetic databases and occurred in highly conserved residues. Knockout of the <i>GTF3C3</i> ortholog in zebrafish recapitulated the key clinical symptoms including microcephaly, brain anomalies and seizure susceptibility. We also observed reduced RNA polymerase III target gene expression in the zebrafish knockout model. This study describes a new neurodevelopmental syndrome in humans and zebrafish associated with biallelic <i>GTF3C3</i> variants and underscores the need for further research into the biological impacts of variants in TFIIIC-linked genes and their contribution to RNA polymerase III-related pathologies.

[7] The clinical and genetic landscape of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies in Egyptian children
    …, R Trunzo, C Pereira, MS Abdel‐Hamid… (2024)
    PMID:38221827 DOI:10.1111/cge.14481 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.14481
    snippet: … Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a heterogeneous group of epilepsies characterized by early-onset, refractory seizures associated with developmental …
    abstract: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a heterogeneous group of epilepsies characterized by early-onset, refractory seizures associated with developmental regression or impairment, with a heterogeneous genetic landscape including genes implicated in various pathways and mechanisms. We retrospectively studied the clinical and genetic data of patients with genetic DEE who presented at two tertiary centers in Egypt over a 10-year period. Exome sequencing was used for genetic testing. We report 74 patients from 63 unrelated Egyptian families, with a high rate of consanguinity (58%). The most common seizure type was generalized tonic-clonic (58%) and multiple seizure types were common (55%). The most common epilepsy syndrome was early infantile DEE (50%). All patients showed variable degrees of developmental impairment. Microcephaly, hypotonia, ophthalmological involvement and neuroimaging abnormalities were common. Eighteen novel variants were identified and the phenotypes of five DEE genes were expanded with novel phenotype-genotype associations. Obtaining a genetic diagnosis had implications on epilepsy management in 17 patients with variants in 12 genes. In this study, we expand the phenotype and genotype spectrum of DEE in a large single ethnic cohort of patients. Reaching a genetic diagnosis guided precision management of epilepsy in a significant proportion of patients.

[8] Accurate and cost-effective workflow integrating trio pooled-WES for novel gene discovery in neurodevelopmental disorders
    L López (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02075-0
    snippet: … presented with epileptic encephalopathy or NDD associated with epilepsy, and 16 showed … and was classified as pathogenic with incomplete penetrance, and therefore not considered …
    abstract: The broad genetic heterogeneity of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) makes their molecular diagnosis particularly challenging. In this context, Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES), specifically in a trio-based design, is a powerful strategy due to its ability to detect de novo variants, which are a major contributor to NDDs. However, its clinical implementation is often limited by its associated cost. In this study, we applied a sequential diagnostic workflow to a cohort of 221 individuals with syndromic NDDs and prior negative results from targeted sequencing. The workflow integrates initial solo-WES, followed by a second-tier trio-WES using pooled parental DNA (trio pooled-WES). Overall, this workflow achieved a diagnostic yield of 20.98% and led to the identification of 13 novel candidate genes. The pooling strategy was optimized and validated, demonstrating that trio pooled-WES retains the main advantages of conventional trio-WES while substantially reducing sequencing costs. These results support its implementation as a clinically applicable approach for the genetic diagnosis of NDDs.

[9] Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the TFIIIC2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11878552 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11878552/
    snippet: by MS Abdel-Hamid · 2025 · Cited by 5 — Abdel-Hamid et al. identified biallelic GTF3C3 variants in four individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders, including developmental delay/intellectual ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase III transcribes essential non-coding RNAs, a process regulated by transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC. Although germline variants in TFIIIC subunit genes have been described in a few patients with neurodevelopmental disorders, the associated pathogenesis and clinical spectrum are not yet well defined. Herein, we describe the identification of biallelic variants in <i>GTF3C3,</i> which encodes a key component of the TFIIIC subunit, in four patients from three unrelated families of different ethnicities collected through GeneMatcher. The patients exhibited microcephaly, developmental delay, intellectual disability and distinctive dysmorphic facies that appear recognizable in very young children. Their brain imaging showed brain atrophy with predominant cerebellar involvement, as well as hypoplasia of the frontal lobes and one patient had moderate to severe simplified gyral pattern. Seizures were observed in half of the patients. Exome/genome sequencing revealed four different <i>GTF3C3</i> variants including three missense (p.Cys172Gly, p.Val427Phe and p.Ala509Thr) and one nonsense variant (p.Arg717Ter). Missense variants were not present in known genetic databases and occurred in highly conserved residues. Knockout of the <i>GTF3C3</i> ortholog in zebrafish recapitulated the key clinical symptoms including microcephaly, brain anomalies and seizure susceptibility. We also observed reduced RNA polymerase III target gene expression in the zebrafish knockout model. This study describes a new neurodevelopmental syndrome in humans and zebrafish associated with biallelic <i>GTF3C3</i> variants and underscores the need for further research into the biological impacts of variants in TFIIIC-linked genes and their contribution to RNA polymerase III-related pathologies.

[10] Biallelic variants in GTF3C3 encoding a subunit of the ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/389571339_Biallelic_variants_in_GTF3C3_encoding_a_subunit_of_the_TFIIIC2_complex_are_associated_with_neurodevelopmental_phenotypes_in_humans_and_zebrafish
    snippet: To date, only 16 individuals with biallelic variants in GTF3C3 have been described (De Hayr et al., 2025; Abdel-Hamid et al., 2025) , underscoring the rarity of ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase III transcribes essential non-coding RNAs, a process regulated by transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC. Although germline variants in TFIIIC subunit genes have been described in a few patients with neurodevelopmental disorders, the associated pathogenesis and clinical spectrum are not yet well defined. Herein, we describe the identification of biallelic variants in <i>GTF3C3,</i> which encodes a key component of the TFIIIC subunit, in four patients from three unrelated families of different ethnicities collected through GeneMatcher. The patients exhibited microcephaly, developmental delay, intellectual disability and distinctive dysmorphic facies that appear recognizable in very young children. Their brain imaging showed brain atrophy with predominant cerebellar involvement, as well as hypoplasia of the frontal lobes and one patient had moderate to severe simplified gyral pattern. Seizures were observed in half of the patients. Exome/genome sequencing revealed four different <i>GTF3C3</i> variants including three missense (p.Cys172Gly, p.Val427Phe and p.Ala509Thr) and one nonsense variant (p.Arg717Ter). Missense variants were not present in known genetic databases and occurred in highly conserved residues. Knockout of the <i>GTF3C3</i> ortholog in zebrafish recapitulated the key clinical symptoms including microcephaly, brain anomalies and seizure susceptibility. We also observed reduced RNA polymerase III target gene expression in the zebrafish knockout model. This study describes a new neurodevelopmental syndrome in humans and zebrafish associated with biallelic <i>GTF3C3</i> variants and underscores the need for further research into the biological impacts of variants in TFIIIC-linked genes and their contribution to RNA polymerase III-related pathologies.