SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … ), seizures, various motor disabilities and abnormal muscle tone. … ), intellectual disability (ID), absent speech or speech limited … Although, OMIM still does not list DHX9 as associated with …

[2] The epilepsy–autism phenotype associated with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies: New mechanism‐based therapeutic options
    N Specchio, V Di Micco, E Aronica, S Auvin… (2025)
    DOI:10.1111/epi.18209 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/epi.18209
    snippet: … is often linked with the severity of intellectual disability (ID) and in … Two DHX9- a ssociated disease traits have been recently … pathogenic DHX9 variants cause abnormal DHX9 cellular …
    abstract: Epilepsy and autism often co-occur in genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs), but their underlying neurobiological processes remain poorly understood, complicating treatment. Advances in molecular genetics and understanding the neurodevelopmental pathogenesis of the epilepsy-autism phenotype may lead to mechanism-based treatments for children with DEEs and autism. Several genes, including the newly reported PPFIA3, MYCBP2, DHX9, TMEM63B, and RELN, are linked to various neurodevelopmental and epileptic disorders, intellectual disabilities, and autistic features. These findings underscore the clinical heterogeneity of genetic DEEs and suggest diverse neurobiological mechanisms influenced by genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. Mechanisms linking epilepsy and autism include γ-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) signaling dysregulation, synaptic plasticity, disrupted functional connectivity, and neuroinflammatory responses. GABA system abnormalities, critical for inhibitory neurotransmission, contribute to both conditions. Dysregulation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and neuroinflammation are also pivotal, affecting seizure generation, drug resistance, and neuropsychiatric comorbidities. Abnormal synaptic function and connectivity further underscore the epilepsy-autism phenotype. New treatment options targeting specific mechanisms linked to the epilepsy-autism phenotype are emerging. Genetic variants in potassium channel genes like KCNQ2 and KCNT1 are frequent causes of early onset DEEs. Personalized treatments like retigabine and quinidine have been explored with heterogeneous responses. Efforts are ongoing to develop more effective KCNQ activators and KCNT1 blockers. SCN1A genetic variants, particularly in Dravet syndrome, show potential for treatment of autistic symptoms with low-dose clonazepam, fenfluramine, and cannabidiol, although human trials have yet to consistently replicate animal model successes. Early intervention before the age of 3 years, particularly in SCN1A- and tuberous sclerosis complex-related DEEs, is crucial. Additionally, targeting the mTOR pathway shows promise for seizure control and managing epilepsy-associated comorbidities. Understanding the distinct autism spectrum disorder phenotype in DEEs and implementing early behavioral interventions are essential for improving outcomes. Despite genetic advances, significant challenges persist in diagnosing and treating DEE-associated epi

[3] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … of developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD/ID) in … DHX9 variants and CMT2, also known as hereditary motor … mild NDD traits (eg, learning disabilities or speech delay). It …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[4] Targeted sequencing identifies 91 neurodevelopmental-disorder risk genes with autism and developmental-disability biases
    HAF Stessman, BO Xiong, BP Coe, T Wang… (2017)
    PMID:28191889 DOI:10.1038/ng.3792 https://www.nature.com/articles/ng.3792
    snippet: … (ASD), intellectual disability/developmental delay (ID/DD), attentiondeficit/hyperactivity, motor and tic … We identified 25 genes showing a bias for autism versus intellectual disability and …
    abstract: Gene-disruptive mutations contribute to the biology of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), but most of the related pathogenic genes are not known. We sequenced 208 candidate genes from >11,730 cases and >2,867 controls. We identified 91 genes, including 38 new NDD genes, with an excess of de novo mutations or private disruptive mutations in 5.7% of cases. Drosophila functional assays revealed a subset with increased involvement in NDDs. We identified 25 genes showing a bias for autism versus intellectual disability and highlighted a network associated with high-functioning autism (full-scale IQ >100). Clinical follow-up for NAA15, KMT5B, and ASH1L highlighted new syndromic and nonsyndromic forms of disease.

[5] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … with intellectual disability, developmental delay, motor issues, … of milestones in the motor domain, speech domain, or both (… DHX9 is used as the loading control. Immunoblotting on …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9 , the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37467750 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.013 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369072477_Monoallelic_variation_in_DHX9_the_gene_encoding_the_DExH-box_helicase_DHX9_underlies_neurodevelopment_disorders_and_Charcot-Marie-Tooth_disease
    snippet: ... intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, and gait abnormalities. ... Early-onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … , including intellectual disability/developmental delay (ID/DD; … can also present with learning and language disabilities [48]. … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[8] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … of DHX9 lead to neurodevelopmental disorder. The high pLI score of DHX9 (ie 1.0) in a large cohort of phenotypically normal individuals suggests that heterozygous DHX9 loss-of-…
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[9] Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Severe Motor Impairment ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:39150459 DOI:10.4103/aian.aian_253_24 PMC11418768 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11418768/
    snippet: by PK Gunasekaran · 2024 · Cited by 2 — NEDMIAL is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severe psychomotor delay, minimal or absent speech development, and central hypotonia from early ...

[10] Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Hypotonia and Gross ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/neurodevelopmental_disorder_with_hypotonia_and_gross_motor_and_speech_delay
    snippet: Neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia and gross motor and speech delay (NEDHMS) is an autosomal recessive disorder. Impaired intellectual development and ...