SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] International multidisciplinary collaboration toward an annotated definition of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    N Dahan‐Oliel, S Cachecho, D Barnes… (2019)
    PMID:31282072 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.c.31721 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.c.31721
    snippet: … the proposed consensus-based AMC definition. For purposes … development of the consensus-based definition for AMC was … of the definition, consisting of a literature review, …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) has been described and defined in thousands of articles, but the terminology used has been inconsistent in clinical and research communities. A definition of AMC was recently developed using a modified Delphi consensus method involving 25 experts in the field of AMC from 8 countries. Participants included health care professionals, researchers, and individuals with AMC. An annotation of the definition provides more in-depth explanations of the different sentences of the AMC definition and is useful to complement the proposed definition. The aim of this study was to provide an annotation of the proposed consensus-based AMC definition. For the annotation process, 17 experts in AMC representing 10 disciplines across 7 countries participated. A paragraph was developed for each sentence of the definition using an iterative process involving multiple authors with varied and complementary expertise, ensuring all points of view were taken into consideration. The annotated definition provides an overview of the different topics related to AMC and is intended for all stakeholders, including youth and adults with AMC, their families, and clinicians and researchers, with the hopes of unifying the understanding of AMC in the international community.

[2] Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita definition: Update using an international consensus‐based approach
    S Cachecho, C Elfassy, R Hamdy… (2019)
    PMID:31452331 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.c.31739 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.c.31739
    snippet: … review and the survey, a draft definition of AMC was developed (Phase 3) and shared with a larger number of stakeholders for consensus … performed until the definition was finalized. A …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) has been described and defined in thousands of articles, but the terminology used has been inconsistent. Some have described it as a diagnosis or syndrome, others as a term or clinical finding. This lack of common language can lead to confusion in clinical and research communities. The aim of this study was to develop a consensus-based definition for AMC using international expert opinion. A consensus-based definition will help harmonize research and clinical endeavors and will facilitate communication among families, clinicians, and researchers. This article describes the methodology used leading to a proposed definition of AMC. First, a literature review was conducted to identify AMC definitions used in included studies. The most commonly used words in the definitions were extracted. Second, a group of eight experts in AMC was selected to identify elements considered critically important to the definition of AMC. Third, based on these critical elements and the literature review, a definition was drafted by the research team. Fourth, a modified Delphi consensus process was conducted using electronic surveys with 25 experts in the field of AMC from eight countries. Survey results were analyzed quantitatively and qualitatively and drafts were modified accordingly. Three rounds of surveys were completed until consensus was reached on a definition of AMC. An annotation of this definition, developed by a panel of international experts, is provided in a separate manuscript in this special issue.

[3] The range of publications on arthrogryposis multiplex congenita from 1995 to 2022—A scoping review
    MV Hermansen, LL Wekre… (2023)
    PMID:37009761 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63201 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63201
    snippet: … definition of AMC has changed multiple times. This scoping review provides an overview of how AMC is defined … Recent publications on AMC mostly used consensus-based definitions. …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is defined as "a group of congenital conditions characterized by joint contractures in two or more body areas." Given its heterogeneity, the definition of AMC has changed multiple times. This scoping review provides an overview of how AMC is defined in scientific publications, on existing knowledge and trends regarding the concept of AMC. Our review illuminates possible knowledge gaps and provides directions for future research. A scoping review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews guidelines. Quantitative studies on AMC from 1995 to date were included. We summarized information about definitions/descriptions of AMC, study objectives, study designs, methods, funding, and involvement of patient organizations. A total of 2729 references were screened, and 141 articles fulfilled our inclusion criteria. Our scoping revealed that the majority of publications were cross-sectional or retrospective studies of children and young people, commonly about orthopedic management. Explicit or good definitions of AMC were provided in 86% of the cases. Recent publications on AMC mostly used consensus-based definitions. The research gaps were primarily related to adults, aging, etiology, and new medical treatment, in addition to implications on daily life.

[4] Management of Lower-Extremity Deformity in Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congentia: A Narrative Review
    Y Shang, J Xu (2026)
    PMID:41821200 DOI:10.12659/msm.951581 PMC12994275 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12994275/
    snippet: … Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a highly heterogeneous constellation of disorders defined by non-… [Expert consensus on the clinical diagnosis and management of …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a highly heterogeneous constellation of disorders defined by non-progressive congenital multiple joint contractures, typically manifesting across multiple limbs. The pathology results in significant functional impairment, including restricted range of motion, chronic arthralgia, and secondary musculoskeletal deformities like scoliosis. Given that AMC is an umbrella designation encompassing over 300 distinct etiologies, the profound clinical variability poses substantial diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. The relative rarity of AMC and the absence of consensus-based, longitudinal treatment protocols create a critical void in standardized clinical management across the lifespan of patients. This comprehensive narrative review synthesizes the contemporary literature and clinical evidence to establish a structured, life-course management paradigm, extending from neonatal screening through to adult care. We advocate for an evidence-based approach that recalibrates therapeutic goals to emphasize maximal functional capacity and societal participation rather than strict anatomical normalization. Key aspects addressed include early-life neuroplasticity, the principles of staged and minimally- invasive surgical correction, and the need for seamless, lifelong, multidisciplinary care coordination. Furthermore, the review critically examines persistent clinical dilemmas concerning hip and knee contracture management, and proposes algorithmic pathways for addressing recurrent foot deformities. By integrating the latest advancements in molecular genetics, surgical innovations, and rehabilitative science, this work serves as an authoritative resource, offering clinically applicable strategies to optimize long-term outcomes for individuals living with AMC.

[5] Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    S Langston, A Chu (2020)
    PMID:32674167 DOI:10.3928/19382359-20200624-01 https://journals.healio.com/doi/abs/10.3928/19382359-20200624-01
    snippet: … This review characterizes the clinical characteristics of a child with suspected AMC and … There are a host of disorders outside the scope of this review that present with aberrant …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a complex, etiologically diverse, clinical descriptor identified in a variety of diagnoses characterized by multiple congenital joint contractures. The root cause of AMC is decreased fetal movement in-utero, whether resulting from maternal or pregnancy influences, nervous system pathology, or an underlying genetic abnormality. Prenatal diagnosis via ultrasonography can be challenging and may require additional imaging techniques or studies. After birth, these infants may require assistance breathing and feeding depending on the underlying diagnosis. Physical therapy and surgical intervention of the contractures are the mainstays of therapy, and outcomes can be good when intervention is provided in a timely manner. Those infants with syndromic causes of arthrogryposis are more likely to have poor outcomes; therefore, determining the underlying etiology for AMC is important as this can influence counseling regarding individual prognosis as well as future pregnancies. [Pediatr Ann. 2020;49(7):e299-e304.].

[6] Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita: otolaryngologic ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:3203986 DOI:10.1016/0165-5876(88)90099-7 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0165587688900997
    snippet: by DR Paugh · 1988 · Cited by 7 — Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is an uncommon congenital disorder characterized by multiple fixed joint deformities and non-progressive ...
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is an uncommon congenital disorder characterized by multiple fixed joint deformities and non-progressive neuromuscular dysfunction. A small fraction of these infants will present with otolaryngologic problems resulting from cranial nerve weakness, muscle dysplasia, or structural dysharmony of the head and neck. The charts of 50 patients with AMC were reviewed to determine the incidence of these findings. A summary of the literature is presented discussing the etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis and management of this interesting clinical problem.

[7] Consensus-based recommendations for the rehabilitation of ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:40205440 DOI:10.1186/s13023-025-03671-x https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13023-025-03671-x
    snippet: by N Dahan‑Oliel · 2025 · Cited by 8 — Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a group of rare disorders characterized by multiple joint contractures present at birth.
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a group of rare disorders characterized by multiple joint contractures present at birth. Early rehabilitation is essential to minimize joint contractures and maximize autonomy and participation among individuals with AMC. However, there is little robust scientific evidence to inform best practice. This project aimed to develop consensus-based recommendations for the rehabilitation management of children with AMC in the following priority areas: early intervention and motor development, muscle and joint function, orthotics, mobility, participation in areas of life, pain, psychosocial wellbeing, and perioperative rehabilitation.<h4>Results</h4>This multi-phase project used an integrated knowledge translation approach. Based on the results from scoping reviews on the priority areas identified for the rehabilitation of children with AMC, and a clinician survey describing current practices in AMC rehabilitation, three panels of expert clinicians in occupational therapy, physical therapy, orthopedics, physiatry, and social work, as well as people with lived experience and researchers from 10 countries developed consensus-based recommendations for rehabilitation, in concordance with the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations framework (GRADE) criteria. A modified Delphi process was completed with a wider group of international AMC experts to revise and validate the recommendations (Round 1 = 41 and Round 2 = 37 experts). A five-member external review panel appraised the recommendations using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II (AGREE II) tool. The final 16 recommendations reached a mean agreement rate of 96.6% after two Delphi rounds. The overall quality was rated at 96.6% on the AGREE II tool. Interviews with clinicians and managers identified facilitators and barriers to implementation of the recommendations in practice using the Theoretical Domain Framework.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Consensus-based, expert validated recommendations for the rehabilitation of children with AMC were developed by a wide range of stakeholders, healthcare users and providers. The proposed recommendations are expected to contribute to improving child- and family-centered practice and health outcomes. Future work includes a knowledge translation strategy to promote sharing and implementation of the recommendations in practice.

[8] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita Support, Inc.
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.facebook.com/AMCSUPPORT/posts/the-term-arthrogryposis-is-greek-from-arthro-joint-gryp-curved-osis-condition-mu/10156917762778429/
    snippet: Thus, arthrogryposis multiplex congenita means curved joints in many (multiplex) areas of the body, which are present at birth(congenita). A ...

[9] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … cause of neuropathic arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with a mild clinical course. Patients … prenatal and postnatal diagnosis, counselling, and prognostication. This review aims to …

[10] Diagnosing arthrogryposis multiplex congenita: a review
    E Kalampokas, T Kalampokas… (2012)
    PMID:23050160 DOI:10.5402/2012/264918 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.5402/2012/264918
    snippet: … and complex clinical features, including multiple congenital … “Prenatal diagnosis of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with … pathology,” Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy, vol. 17, no. 1, …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) refers either to a syndromic or to a nonsyndromic group of conditions with varied etiology and complex clinical features, including multiple congenital contractures in different body areas. Its etiology still remains unclear but generally any cause that leads to reduced fetal movement may lead to congenital contractures and in severe cases to fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). It affects approximately 1 in 2-3000 live births with an approximately equal gender ratio. There are many known subgroups of AMC differing in signs, symptoms, and causes. The primary diagnosis is made when a lack of mobility and an abnormal position is noted in routine ultrasound scanning. Early diagnosis, prenatal evaluation, and further surveillance via image scanning (ultrasound and MRI) give the opportunity for family counseling concerning neonatal morbidity and mortality and labor or delivery planning. Better understanding of the ultrasound findings and the etiology of this clinical situation offers the opportunity for careful prenatal assessment.