SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: … previously reported the first individual with a disease-causing in-frame deletion in MAU2 and a classic CdLS phenotype11. More recently, a second individual carrying a missense …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[2] MAU2 and NIPBL variants impair the heterodimerization of the cohesin loader subunits and cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    I Parenti, F Diab, SR Gil, E Mulugeta, V Casa, R Berutti… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/cell-reports/fulltext/S2211-1247(20)30600-8
    snippet: … rare developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Here we report a MAU2 variant … Here we describe the first genetic variant in MAU2 causing a CdLS phenotype. The …
    abstract: The NIPBL/MAU2 heterodimer loads cohesin onto chromatin. Mutations in NIPBL account for most cases of the rare developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Here we report a MAU2 variant causing CdLS, a deletion of seven amino acids that impairs the interaction between MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus. Investigating this interaction, we discovered that MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus are largely dispensable for normal cohesin and NIPBL function in cells with a NIPBL early truncating mutation. Despite a predicted fatal outcome of an out-of-frame single nucleotide duplication in NIPBL, engineered in two different cell lines, alternative translation initiation yields a form of NIPBL missing N-terminal residues. This form cannot interact with MAU2, but binds DNA and mediates cohesin loading. Altogether, our work reveals that cohesin loading can occur independently of functional NIPBL/MAU2 complexes and highlights a novel mechanism protective against out-of-frame mutations that is potentially relevant for other genetic conditions.

[3] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, HM AlDhalaan, FJ Kaiser, F Al (2026)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/author/24170976000/hesham-m-aldhalaan
    snippet: … Clinically, these individuals exhibited a consistent phenotype including infantile hypotonia, severe neurodevelopmental delay, intractable seizures, along with distinct dysmorphic …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[4] Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction
    D Braunholz, M Hullings, MC Gil (2012)
    PMID:21934712 DOI:10.1038/ejhg.2011.175 https://www.nature.com/articles/ejhg2011175
    snippet: … We hypothesized that disruption of the NIPBL–MAU2 … the interaction domains of NIPBL and MAU2, and tested the role of … –MAU2 binding in the determination of human phenotype. …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; or Brachmann-de Lange syndrome) is a dominantly inherited congenital malformation disorder with features that include characteristic facies, cognitive delays, growth retardation and limb anomalies. Mutations in nearly 60% of CdLS patients have been identified in NIPBL, which encodes a regulator of the sister chromatid cohesion complex. NIPBL, also known as delangin, is a homolog of yeast and amphibian Scc2 and C. elegans PQN-85. Although the exact mechanism of NIPBL function in sister chromatid cohesion is unclear, in vivo yeast and C. elegans experiments and in vitro vertebrate cell experiments have demonstrated that NIPBL/Scc2 functionally interacts with the MAU2/Scc4 protein to initiate loading of cohesin onto chromatin. To test the significance of this model in the clinical setting of CdLS, we fine-mapped the NIBPL-MAU2 interaction domain and tested the functional significance of missense mutations and variants in NIPBL and MAU2 identified in these minimal domains in a cohort of patients with CdLS. We demonstrate that specific novel mutations at the N-terminus of the MAU2-interacting domain of NIBPL result in markedly reduced MAU2 binding, although we appreciate no consistent clinical difference in the small group of patients with these mutations. These data suggest that factors in addition to MAU2 are essential in determining the clinical features and severity of CdLS.

[5] Assessment of the transcriptomic consequences and MAU2 protein levels in edited induced pluripotent stem cells with NIPBL pathogenic variants
    K Cassinari, A Rovelet (2025)
    PMID:39917313 DOI:10.1016/j.gendis.2024.101386 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352304224001831
    snippet: … Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is an intellectual disability syndrome … MAU2 in CdLS pathogenesis and highlight deregulated genes contributing to the syndrome's phenotype…

[6] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1104/
    snippet: by MA Deardorff · 2020 · Cited by 188 — BRD4-, MAU2-, NIPBL-, RAD21-, and SMC3-related Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) are autosomal dominant disorders typically caused by a de novo ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[7] Clinical study and genetic analysis of Cornelia de Lange ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37962004 DOI:10.1002/mgg3.2318 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37962004/
    snippet: by Y Peng · 2024 · Cited by 6 — Keywords: CdLS; Cornelia de Lange syndrome; MAU2; cohesin; genetic testing. ... Phenotype. Substances. Cell Cycle Proteins; NIPBL protein ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is mainly characterized by specific facial features, growth retardation, and bone deformities. Seven genes reportedly cause CdLS. Recent research has reported that loss-of-function variants affecting MAU2, which encodes a regulator of the cohesin complex, can cause CdLS. Thus far, only one MAU2-CdLS case has been reported worldwide.<h4>Methods</h4>We detected a novel variant in MAU2 gene, NM_015329, c.526C>T (p.Arg176Trp) in a Chinese patient with CdLS, constructed a plasmid for in vitro transcriptional and protein level analysis, and analyzed the interaction between the MAU2/NIPBL complex using molecular dynamics (MD).<h4>Results</h4>The results showed that the level of the exogenous MAU2 mutant protein was significantly reduced compared with that of the exogenous wild-type protein. However, MD analysis predicted an increased binding free energy between the MAU2 and NIPBL proteins that may impact the structural stability of the complex.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We investigated a MAU2-CdLS case in a Chinese family, which strengthens the association between MAU2 variants and CdLS phenotypes. We therefore propose that MAU2 be included in the CdLS gene screening list.

[8] 621570 - CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 7; CDLS7
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621570
    snippet: ... phenotype and genotype. It is updated ... Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange syndrome subtype.

[9] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:20301283 https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/942792-overview
    snippet: MAU2 mutations can mimic classic CdLS, and EP300 variants can produce a CdLS-like phenotype in the form of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Mosaic ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[10] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 lead to a new Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    …, L de Polli Cellin, AR Clause, AA de Lima Jorge… (2025)
    PMC12668068 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12668068/
    snippet: … loader subunit NIPBL (OMIM #608667) is the primary contributor, with disease-causing variants … in variant location, similar functional consequences, or variability in clinical phenotype. …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While  NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of  MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous  MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. MAU2 in-frame variants predominantly impair NIPBL–MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause  MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most patients exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also identified two  MAU2 -specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features. A heterozygous  Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulated these traits, confirming the causal role of  MAU2 disruption  in vivo. Our study establishes  MAU2 as a new CdLS-associated gene and delineates a  MAU2 -related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.