SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1
    D Tonduti, I Dorboz, A Imbard, A Slama… (2015)
    DOI:10.1186/s13023-015-0237-6 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13023-015-0237-6
    snippet: … mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration. … Peripheral neuropathy is a typical feature in PDHA1 deficiency [7]. On our patient, NFU1 mutations …
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[2] A genetic mimic of cerebral palsy: Homozygous NFU1 mutation with marked intrafamilial phenotypic variation
    TA Uzunhan, NE Çakar, S Seyhan, K Aydin (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0387760420301911
    snippet: … [5] described a new spastic paraplegia phenotype that had … with NFU1 in a 30-year-old patient with spastic paraplegia … serum glycine levels in the range of 661–1138 µmol/L (normal …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Genetic defects in the NFU1, an iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein coding gene, which is vital in the final stage of assembly for iron sulfur proteins, have been defined as multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome I. This disorder is a severe autosomal recessive disease with onset in early infancy. It is characterized by disruption of the energy metabolism, resulting in weakness, neurological regression, hyperglycinemia, lactic acidosis, and early death.<h4>Patient description</h4>This report documents the case of a 27-month-old girl, who showed clinical signs and symptoms of spastic paraparesis with a relapsing-remitting course. The patient had a sister with a severe phenotype who died at the age of 16 months.<h4>Results</h4>Magnetic resonance imaging revealed hyperintensity of the cerebral white matter that was more prominent in the frontal regions, with milder involvement in the posterior periventricular regions. There was also evidence of partial cystic degeneration and cavitation in the frontal regions. In addition, she had hyperglycinemia. Homozygous NM_001002755.4:c.565G>A (p.Gly189Arg) mutation was identified in the NFU1 gene; this had not previously been reported as homozygous.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Hyperglycinemia and cavitating leukodystrophy are suggestive of an NFU1 mutation diagnosis. An intrafamilial phenotypic variation has not been published in NFU1-associated disorders before. Presenting with spasticity as a rare phenotype, NFU1 mutations could be considered a genetic mimic of cerebral palsy.

[3] Differential diagnosis of lipoic acid synthesis defects
    F Tort, X Ferrer‐Cortes, A Ribes (2016)
    DOI:10.1007/s10545-016-9975-4 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1007/s10545-016-9975-4
    snippet: … NFU1 patients reported was described in one individual showing the typical clinical characteristics of NFU1 … defects showed high glycine in body fluids but normal CSF/plasma ratio, …
    abstract: Lipoic acid (LA) is an essential cofactor required for the activity of five multienzymatic complexes that play a central role in the mitochondrial energy metabolism: four 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes [pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH), 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (2-KGDH), and 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase (2-OADH)] and the glycine cleavage system (GCS). LA is synthesized in a complex multistep process that requires appropriate function of the mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis (mtFASII) and the biogenesis of iron-sulphur (Fe-S) clusters. Defects in the biosynthesis of LA have been reported to be associated with multiple and severe defects of the mitochondrial energy metabolism. In recent years, disease-causing mutations in genes encoding for proteins involved in LA metabolism have been reported: NFU1, BOLA3, IBA57, LIAS, GLRX5, LIPT1, ISCA2, and LIPT2. These studies represented important progress in understanding the pathophysiology and molecular bases underlying these disorders. Here we review current knowledge regarding involvement of LA synthesis defects in human diseases with special emphasis on the diagnostic strategies for these disorders. The clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients with LA synthesis defects are discussed and a workup for the differential diagnosis proposed.

[4] Clinical and genetic aspects of defects in the mitochondrial iron–sulfur cluster synthesis pathway
    AV Vanlander, R Van Coster (2018)
    DOI:10.1007/s00775-018-1550-z https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00775-018-1550-z
    snippet: … Similar to NFU1 deficient subjects, increased lactate and glycine are a common feature of subjects with BOLA3 deficiency, together with defective lipoylation. Similar to NFU1 patients, …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur clusters are evolutionarily conserved biological structures which play an important role as cofactor for multiple enzymes in eukaryotic cells. The biosynthesis pathways of the iron-sulfur clusters are located in the mitochondria and in the cytosol. The mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis pathway (ISC) can be divided into at least twenty enzymatic steps. Since the description of frataxin deficiency as the cause of Friedreich's ataxia, multiple other deficiencies in ISC biosynthesis pathway have been reported. In this paper, an overview is given of the clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects reported in humans affected by a defect in iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis.

[5] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis and neurological disorders
    A Selvanathan, BP Sankaran (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567724921001446
    snippet: … There are common biochemical signatures in most of these … by bi-allelic deleterious changes in NFU1. The initial reported … Patients can have raised plasma and CSF glycine and lactate…
    abstract: Iron-sulfur clusters (ISCs) are highly conserved moieties embedded into numerous crucial proteins in almost all bacteria, plants and mammals. As such, ISC biosynthesis is critical to cellular function. The pathway was first characterized in bacteria by the late 1990s, and over the subsequent 20 years there has been increasing understanding of its components in humans. Defects in the ISC pathway are now associated with many different human disease states, such as Friedreich ataxia and ISCU myopathy. Whilst the disorders have variable clinical features, most involve neurological phenotypes. There are common biochemical signatures in most of these conditions, as a lack of ISCs causes deficiencies of target proteins including Complex I, II and III, aconitase and lipoic acid. This review focuses on the disorders of ISC biogenesis that have been described in the literature to-date. Key clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological features will be discussed, providing a reference point for clinicians diagnosing and managing these patients. Therapies are mostly supportive at this stage. However, the improved understanding of the pathophysiology of these conditions could pave the way for disease-modifying therapies in the near future.

[6] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC4333890 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4333890/
    snippet: by D Tonduti · 2015 · Cited by 38 — ... NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration. ... Spastic paraplegia, NFU1. Dear editor,. Mutations ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[7] 620938 - SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 93, AUTOSOMAL ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620938
    snippet: ... spastic paraplegia phenotype and mutation in the NFU1 gene. Thirteen of the ... Laboratory testing showed elevated serum glycine. A brain MRI showed ...

[8] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1
    (authors not shown)
    https://d-nb.info/1239172095/34
    snippet: NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration. ... Keywords: Irons sulfur clusters, Leukoencephalopathy, Spastic paraplegia ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[9] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272374033_New_spastic_paraplegia_phenotype_associated_to_mutation_of_NFU1
    snippet: New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1 ... Treatment consists of glycine reduction and blocking the effect of glycine on ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[10] Spastic Paraplegia 93, Autosomal Recessive (SPG93)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/spastic_paraplegia_93_autosomal_recessive
    snippet: Autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 93 (SPG93) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the NFU1 gene on chromosome 2p13.