SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A Novel Homozygous Frameshift GTPBP2 Variant in Jaberi-Elahi Syndrome: First Case Report from Türkiye
    M Soğukpınar, Y Ataş, G Üner, P Arslan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1159/000552675/949444 https://karger.com/msy/article-abstract/doi/10.1159/000552675/949444
    snippet: … by introducing a novel truncating variant and provides additional early-life phenotypic data. As the natural history appears heterogeneous and potentially age dependent, further …

[2] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and a brief report of the disease in Iran
    R Hajati, M Emamikhah, FD Fard… (2022)
    https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/canadian-journal-of-neurological-sciences/article/neurodegeneration-with-brain-iron-accumulation-and-a-brief-report-of-the-disease-in-iran/F1086EF553402CA967D7E406A870BCB4
    snippet: … gènes liés à la NBIA, le GTPBP2, a été identifié dans une famille … This type of disease is categorized into three phenotypic … (strabismus, nystagmus, and optic atrophy) are prominent in …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a term used for a group of hereditary neurological disorders with abnormal accumulation of iron in basal ganglia. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with symptoms such as dystonia, dysarthria, Parkinsonism, intellectual disability, and spasticity. The age at onset and rate of progression are variable among individuals. Current therapies are exclusively symptomatic and unable to hinder the disease progression. Approximately 16 genes have been identified and affiliated to such condition with different functions such as iron metabolism (only two genes: Ferritin Light Chain (FTL) Ceruloplasmin (CP)), lipid metabolism, lysosomal functions, and autophagy process, but some functions have remained unknown so far. Subgroups of NBIA are categorized based on the mutant genes. Although in the last 10 years, the development of whole-exome sequencing (WES) technology has promoted the identification of disease-causing genes, there seem to be some unknown genes and our knowledge about the molecular aspects and pathogenesis of NBIA is not complete yet. There is currently no comprehensive study about the NBIA in Iran; however, one of the latest discovered NBIA genes, GTP-binding protein 2 (GTPBP2), has been identified in an Iranian family, and there are some patients who have genetically remained unknown.

[3] Clinical delineation of GTPBP2‐associated neuro‐ectodermal syndrome: Report of two new families and review of the literature
    MT Carter, S Venkateswaran… (2019)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.13523 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13523
    snippet: … variants to expand our understanding of the phenotypic … This condition is listed in OMIM (MIM 617988) as Jaberi-Elahi … ERG: significantly abnormal Optic atrophy no ERG reported …
    abstract: The GTPBP2 gene encodes a guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein of unknown function. Biallelic loss-of-function variants in the GTPBP2 gene have been previously reported in association with a neuro-ectodermal clinical presentation in six individuals from four unrelated families. Here, we provide detailed descriptions of three additional individuals from two unrelated families in the context of the previous literature. Both families carry nonsense variants in GTPBP2: homozygous p.(Arg470*) and compound heterozygous p.(Arg432*)/p.(Arg131*). Key features of this clinically recognizable condition include prenatal onset microcephaly, tone abnormalities, and movement disorders, epilepsy, dysmorphic features, retinal dysfunction, ectodermal dysplasia, and brain iron accumulation. Our findings suggest that some aspects of the clinical presentation appear to be age-related; brain iron accumulation may appear only after childhood, and the ectodermal findings and peripheral neuropathy are most prominent in older individuals. In addition, we present prenatal and neonatal findings as well as the first Caucasian and black African families with GTPBP2 biallelic variants. The individuals described herein provide valuable additional phenotypic information about this rare, novel, and progressive neuroectodermal condition.

[4] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    SA Schneider (2025)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780443191763000558
    snippet: … , and early visual disturbances due to optic atrophy. Late-onset PLAN is characterized by … GTPBP2 mutations 20 are another rare cause of NBIA, sometimes referred to as Jaberi–Elahi …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.

[5] Clinical and neuroimaging phenotypes of genetic parkinsonism from infancy to adolescence
    H Morales (2020)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/143/3/751/5652047
    snippet: … rise to a broad phenotypic spectrum and that, conversely different genetic disorders can manifest with a similar phenotype. Accurate phenotypic characterization remains an essential …
    abstract: Genetic early-onset parkinsonism presenting from infancy to adolescence (≤21 years old) is a clinically diverse syndrome often combined with other hyperkinetic movement disorders, neurological and imaging abnormalities. The syndrome is genetically heterogeneous, with many causative genes already known. With the increased use of next-generation sequencing in clinical practice, there have been novel and unexpected insights into phenotype-genotype correlations and the discovery of new disease-causing genes. It is now recognized that mutations in a single gene can give rise to a broad phenotypic spectrum and that, conversely different genetic disorders can manifest with a similar phenotype. Accurate phenotypic characterization remains an essential step in interpreting genetic findings in undiagnosed patients. However, in the past decade, there has been a marked expansion in knowledge about the number of both disease-causing genes and phenotypic spectrum of early-onset cases. Detailed knowledge of genetic disorders and their clinical expression is required for rational planning of genetic and molecular testing, as well as correct interpretation of next-generation sequencing results. In this review we examine the relevant literature of genetic parkinsonism with ≤21 years onset, extracting data on associated movement disorders as well as other neurological and imaging features, to delineate syndromic patterns associated with early-onset parkinsonism. Excluding PRKN (parkin) mutations, >90% of the presenting phenotypes have a complex or atypical presentation, with dystonia, abnormal cognition, pyramidal signs, neuropsychiatric disorders, abnormal imaging and abnormal eye movements being the most common features. Furthermore, several imaging features and extraneurological manifestations are relatively specific for certain disorders and are important diagnostic clues. From the currently available literature, the most commonly implicated causes of early-onset parkinsonism have been elucidated but diagnosis is still challenging in many cases. Mutations in ∼70 different genes have been associated with early-onset parkinsonism or may feature parkinsonism as part of their phenotypic spectrum. Most of the cases are caused by recessively inherited mutations, followed by dominant and X-linked mutations, and rarely by mitochondrially inherited mutations. In infantile-onset parkinsonism, the phenotype of hypokinetic-rigid syndrome is most commonly caused by disorders of monoa

[6] Jaberi-Elahi syndrome: Exploring a novel GTPBP2 mutation and a literature review
    J Manoochehri, A Shiri, S Khoddam… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721224000454
    snippet: … , and visual impairment. In this study, we describe a three-year-old girl with a novel homozygous variant in GTPBP2 and a phenotype overlapping with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. This …
    abstract: Jaberi-Elahi syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disease caused by pathogenic variants in GTPBP2. The core symptoms of this disease are intellectual disability, motor development delay, abnormal reflexes, skeletal abnormalities, and visual impairment. In this study, we describe a three-year-old girl with a novel homozygous variant in GTPBP2 and a phenotype overlapping with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. This variant (NM_019096.5:c.1289T > C, p.Leu430Pro) was identified by Whole Exome Sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing although remains classified as VUS based on ACMG criteria. The proband demonstrated motor and intellectual developmental delay, muscle weakness, language disorder, facial dysmorphism, and poor growth. Hitherto, twenty-seven individuals with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome have been reported in the literature. This study, describes a review of the symptoms related to the Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. A large numbers of patients manifest motor development delay (26/28), sparse hair (26/28), and speech disorder (24/28). Moreover, a significant fraction of patients suffer from intellectual disability (23/28), hypotonia (23/28), skeletal problems (23/28), and visual impairment (18/28). In spite of previous patients, the proband in this study did not exhibit any skeletal abnormalities. In summary, we present evidence implicating a novel missense variant in Jaberi-Elahi syndrome, expanding and refining the genetic spectrum of this condition.

[7] Identification of mutation in GTPBP2 in patients of a family with neurodegeneration accompanied by iron deposition in the brain
    E Jaberi, M Rohani, GA Shahidi, S Nafissi, E Arefian… (2016)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0197458015005461
    snippet: … disease not easily classified as one of the known disorders. The … a mutation in GTPBP2 that may be cause of the disease. … a mutation in GTPBP2 as possible cause of disease in patients …
    abstract: We aimed to identify the genetic cause of a neurologic disorder accompanied with mental deficiency in a consanguineous family with 3 affected siblings by linkage analysis and exome sequencing. Iron accumulation in the brain of the patients was a notable phenotypic feature. A full-field electroretinography revealed generalized dysfunction of photoreceptors, bipolar cells, and amacrine cells. A splice site mutation in GTPBP2 that encodes GTP-binding protein 2 was identified in the patients and considered possible cause of their disease. The mutation was empirically shown to cause deletion of exon 9 of the gene and result in production of a truncated protein-lacking conserved C-terminus domains. GTPBP2 is a member of the GTPase superfamily of proteins. A recent report of identification of another splice site mutation in GTPBP2 in mice that causes neurodegeneration, and retinal damage provides supportive evidence for our finding. The conditions in the affected individuals of the family studied may define a novel form of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, and GTPBP2 may be a novel neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation gene.

[8] GTPBP2 in-frame deletion in canine model with non-syndromic progressive retinal atrophy
    L Murgiano, JK Niggel, EE Akyürek, R Sacchetto… (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-025-89446-7
    snippet: … The common theme between IRDs is that visual impairment … retinal interneurons to higher visual centers. Inherited retinal … for GTPBP2 are associated with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome (OMIM …
    abstract: Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), caused by aberrant functioning of rod/cone photoreceptors, leads to blindness affecting mammals, including dogs. We identified a litter of three Labrador retrievers affected by non-syndromic PRA; the parents and three other siblings were unaffected. Homozygosity mapping and whole-genome sequencing detected a homozygous 3-bp deletion in the coding region of GTPBP2, located in CFA12 (NC_049233.1:12,264,348_12,264,350del, c.1606_1608del, p.Ala536del). The variant was absent from the online European Variation Archive (EVA) database, the Dog Biomedical Variants Database Consortium, and the Dog10k database. We tested 91 non-affected dogs from the same kennel and found 75 wild-type (WT) and 16 carriers, all clinically normal, and 569 Labradors from the general population (USA), all WT. GTPBP2 is associated with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome (JES) in Homo sapiens, and splice variants in Mus musculus are associated with neurodegeneration; in both cases photoreceptor degeneration may be included in its manifestation. Heterologous cellular systems were transfected with cDNA encoding WT or A536del mutant GTPBP2 protein and immunoblot analysis of total cell lysate with anti-GTPBP2 antibodies showed that the expression level of the GTPBP2 mutant protein A536del is slightly but not significantly reduced compared to WT. Immunofluorescent methods and confocal analysis of cells transfected with WT or A536del GTPBP2 protein revealed that the WT form is diffuse throughout the cytosol, while the mutant form resulted in the formation of cytoplasmic aggregates in ~70-80% of cells. The deleted amino acid falls within a conserved interval outside the GTP domain of GTPBP2, suggesting a potentially novel role of the sequence on cellular localization of the protein.

[9] Generating a mutant GTPBP2 plasmid to study canine non-syndromic progressive retinal atrophy
    EE AKYUREK
    https://thesis.unipd.it/handle/20.500.12608/105552
    snippet: … behavioral signs of visual impairment, with variability in age of onset and rate of … in GTPBP2, a gene in which pathogenic variants have also been associated with Jaberi–Elahi syndrome …

[10] Entry - #617988 - JABERI-ELAHI SYNDROME; JABELS
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/617988
    snippet: All had visual impairment, noted to be optic atrophy in 1 patient. ... GTPBP2 gene cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with severe intellectual disability.