SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Expanding the clinical spectrum of RAB3A: from cerebellar ataxia to spastic paraplegia
    C Mouraux, JL Méreaux, CS Davoine, L Guillot (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/11/e96/8175149
    snippet: … Arg83Trp and autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia. The prevalence of pathogenic variants in RAB3A in our cohort of 1235 exomes from ataxia and/or spastic paraplegia patients was …

[2] The RAB3A hot spot variant R83W causes spasticity as part of the ataxia-spasticity spectrum
    JR Roller, A Yahia, G Stevanin, AE Ahmed… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/4/e36/8408500
    snippet: … of a cohort of 1235 ataxia and/or spastic paraplegia patients. Three of … Arg83Trp), which we had previously identified in nine unrelated families presenting with pure cerebellar ataxia…

[3] RAB3A variants in ataxia and other neurodegenerative disorders
    M Percetti, E Monfrini, R Del Bo, M Canesi, F Cavallieri… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/1/e1/8286274
    snippet: … 2 screened RAB3A in a cohort of 1235 individuals with cerebellar ataxia and/or spastic paraplegia who … Arg83Trp variant recurred in three families with autosomal dominant cerebellar …

[4] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a partial loss-of-function mechanism
    H Hengel, SB Hannan, S Reich, D Beijer, J Roller… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/8/2812/8102230
    snippet: … 10 with hereditary ataxia, 4 with hereditary spastic paraplegia, 2 with … aetiological genes for ataxia or hereditary spastic paraplegia (… between RAB3A containing the variant Arg83Trp and …
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[5] RAB3A variants in ataxia and other neurodegenerative ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41092193 DOI:10.1093/brain/awaf383 PMC12782161 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12782161/
    snippet: by M Percetti · 2025 — Arg83Trp variant ... Mouraux C, Méreaux JL, Davoine CS, et al. Expanding the clinical spectrum of RAB3A: From cerebellar ataxia to spastic paraplegia.

[6] RAB3A variants in ataxia and other neurodegenerative ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1093/brain/awaf383/64704517/awaf383.pdf https://academic.oup.com/brain/advance-article-pdf/doi/10.1093/brain/awaf383/64704517/awaf383.pdf
    snippet: by M Percetti · 2026 — Arg83Trp variant recurred in nine families. Affected carriers ... Expanding the clinical spectrum of RAB3A: From cerebellar ataxia to spastic paraplegia.

[7] Gene: RAB3A (Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/317/gene/RAB3A/
    snippet: Arg83Trp. ... ataxia, was found to be a sensory ataxia. There ... gene: RAB3A was added gene: RAB3A was added to Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia - paediatric.

[8] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390376689_Heterozygous_RAB3A_variants_cause_cerebellar_ataxia_by_a_partial_loss-of-function_mechanism
    snippet: ... RAB3A (Arg83Trp, Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function ... with hereditary ataxia. Additional genetic evidence for RAB3A as an ataxia.
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[9] From genes to neuropathology: Integrative perspectives on the spectrum of spinocerebellar ataxias
    JJ de Vries, MJ da Costa Caiado… (2026)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/0aa50d82ac7d4e1bb43aa33a08b43adb/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2044862
    snippet: … phenotypic spectrum ranges from relatively pure cerebellar … by heterozygous mutation in the RAB3A (Ras-related Protein) … with autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia remain without a …
    abstract: This review describes the clinically and genetically heterogenous group of 52 Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs). After a brief description of the epidemiology and clinical spectrum, this review highlights the functional neuroanatomy, the need for sufficient sampling based on this knowledge, and showcases examples of neuropathology. In addition, a comprehensive overview of the pathogenesis of the different forms of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) is given.

[10] Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration associated with altered neurotransmission
    A Giannakopoulou (2017)
    https://www.termedia.pl/Neuronal-vacuolation-and-spinocerebellar-degeneration-associated-with-altered-neurotransmission,20,30152,0,1.html
    snippet: … that recapitulate the WARBM phenotype. Neuropathological … dogs [13,27,41,43,52] and their cross [12]. Typical signs of … , the GTP-bound form of Rab3A accumulates in the brain and the …
    abstract: <i>Inherited neurodegenerative disorders are debilitating diseases that occur across different species, such as the domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris), and many are caused by mutations in the same genes as corresponding human conditions. In the present study, we report an inherited neurodegenerative condition, termed 'neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration' (NVSD) which affects neonatal or young dogs, mainly Rottweilers, which recently has been linked with the homozygosity for the RAB3GAP1:c.743delC allele. Mutations in human RAB3GAP1 cause Warburg micro syndrome (WARBM), a severe developmental disorder characterized predominantly by abnormalities of the nervous system including axonal peripheral neuropathy. RAB3GAP1 encodes the catalytic subunit of a GTPase activator protein and guanine exchange factor for Rab3 and Rab18 proteins, respectively. Rab proteins are involved in membrane trafficking in the endoplasmic reticulum, autophagy, axonal transport and synaptic transmission. The present study attempts to carry out a detailed histopathological examination of NVSD disease, extending from peripheral nerves to lower brain structures focusing on the neurotransmitter alterations noted in the cerebellum, the major structure affected. NVSD dogs presented with progressive cerebellar ataxia and some clinical manifestations that recapitulate the WARBM phenotype. Neuropathological examination revealed dystrophic axons, neurodegeneration and intracellular vacuolization in specific nuclei. In the cerebellum, severe vacuolation of cerebellar nuclei neurons, atrophy of Purkinje cells, and diminishing of GABAergic and glutamatergic fibres constitute the most striking lesions. The balance of evidence suggests that the neuropathological lesions are a reaction to the altered neurotransmission. The canine phenotype could serve as a model to delineate the disease-causing pathological mechanisms in RAB3GAP1 mutation. </i>.