SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … , cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases … No other SNVs/CNVs of relevance to her eye phenotype … While ocular phenotypes were not assessed in Kdm2b ΔCxxC …
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[2] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series Supporting the CxxC Domain Phenotype With Emphasis on Ocular and Dermatologic Features
    A Gomes, Á Martín‐Rodríguez… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: … The spectrum of congenital anomalies in our individuals includes cardiac septal defects and unilateral renal agenesis. When integrated with published data, these findings suggest that …
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[3] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B‐Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder and the 12q24. 31 Microdeletion Syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, TC Hsieh, M Koetsier… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70169
    snippet: … cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities (OMIM # 621474) [14]. … the KDM2Bspecific episignature. We analyse the genotype–phenotype correlations of the KDM2B- …
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[4] Syndromic diabetes and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism in a boy with a 12q24. 31–32 chromosomal deletion involving HNF1A, DHX37, and SETD1B
    T Nakagawa, D Saito, H Shima… (2026)
    https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/cpe/advpub/0/advpub_2026-0011/_article/-char/ja/
    snippet: … Deletion of DHX37 may lead to a hypergonadotropic hypogonadism phenotype. The 152 … phenotype. Similar to the current case, several previous chromosomal deletions involving 162 …

[5] Comprehensive genetic landscape of uveal melanoma by whole-genome sequencing
    B Royer (2016)
    PMID:27745836 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.008 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(16)30388-3
    snippet: Uveal melanoma (UM) is a rare intraocular tumor that, similar to cutaneous melanoma, originates from melanocytes. To gain insights into its genetics, we performed whole-genome …
    abstract: Uveal melanoma (UM) is a rare intraocular tumor that, similar to cutaneous melanoma, originates from melanocytes. To gain insights into its genetics, we performed whole-genome sequencing at very deep coverage of tumor-control pairs in 33 samples (24 primary and 9 metastases). Genome-wide, the number of coding mutations was rather low (only 17 variants per tumor on average; range 7-28), thus radically different from cutaneous melanoma, where hundreds of exonic DNA insults are usually detected. Furthermore, no UV light-induced mutational signature was identified. Recurrent coding mutations were found in the known UM drivers GNAQ, GNA11, BAP1, EIF1AX, and SF3B1. Other genes, i.e., TP53BP1, CSMD1, TTC28, DLK2, and KTN1, were also found to harbor somatic mutations in more than one individual, possibly indicating a previously undescribed association with UM pathogenesis. De novo assembly of unmatched reads from non-coding DNA revealed peculiar copy-number variations defining specific UM subtypes, which in turn could be associated with metastatic transformation. Mutational-driven comparison with other tumor types showed that UM is very similar to pediatric tumors, characterized by very few somatic insults and, possibly, important epigenetic changes. Through the analysis of whole-genome sequencing data, our findings shed new light on the molecular genetics of uveal melanoma, delineating it as an atypical tumor of the adult for which somatic events other than mutations in exonic DNA shape its genetic landscape and define its metastatic potential.

[6] Entry - #621474 - NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621474
    snippet: NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER WITH CONGENITAL CARDIAC DEFECTS AND VARIABLE RENAL AND OCULAR ABNORMALITIES; NEDCRO · Phenotype-Gene Relationships · TEXT · Description.

[7] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC13247248 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13247248/
    snippet: by F Ceroni · 2026 · Cited by 1 — KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder: a case-series supporting the CxxC domain phenotype with emphasis on ocular and dermatologic features. Am J Med ...
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[8] Gene: KDM2B (Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/63/gene/KDM2B/
    snippet: ... renal and ocular abnormalities, MIM# 621474. OMIM: 609078; ClinGen: KDM2B; DECIPHER: KDM2B; Clinvar variants: Variants in KDM2B; Penetrance: None; Publications.

[9] KDM2B - DECIPHER v11.40
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.deciphergenomics.org/gene/KDM2B/overview
    snippet: DatabasE of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype ... KDM2B 12:121429096-121582279. Reverse strand gene ... renal and ocular abnormalities (Autosomal ...

[10] Insights into the genotype–phenotype relationship of ocular manifestations in Kabuki syndrome
    SS Shah, A Fulton, M Jabroun… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63155 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63155
    snippet: … Urinary tract anomalies commonly consisted of anatomical renal changes with occasional … frequency of cardiac anomalies in KS1 in our cohort compared with the reported frequency in …
    abstract: We aim to assess if genotype-phenotype correlations are present within ocular manifestations of Kabuki syndrome (KS) among a large multicenter cohort. We conducted a retrospective, medical record review including clinical history and comprehensive ophthalmological examinations of a total of 47 individuals with molecularly confirmed KS and ocular manifestations at Boston Children's Hospital and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. We assessed information regarding ocular structural, functional, and adnexal elements as well as pertinent associated phenotypic features associated with KS. For both type 1 KS (KS1) and type 2 KS (KS2), we observed more severe eye pathology in nonsense variants towards the C-terminus of each gene, KMT2D and KDM6A, respectively. Furthermore, frameshift variants appeared to be not associated with structural ocular elements. Between both types of KS, ocular structural elements were more frequently identified in KS1 compared with KS2, which only involved the optic disc in our cohort. These results reinforce the need for a comprehensive ophthalmologic exam upon diagnosis of KS and regular follow-up exams. The specific genotype may allow risk stratification of the severity of the ophthalmologic manifestation. However, additional studies involving larger cohorts are needed to replicate our observations and conduct powered analyses to more formally risk-stratify based on genotype, highlighting the importance of multicenter collaborations in rare disease research.