SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in … clinically observed features included axial hypotonia (7/14) … with a neurodevelopmental phenotype could corroborate this …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[2] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … were severe developmental delay, hypotonia, and feeding difficulties … of the phenotypic data collected from the Dhx9 mutant flies, … The high pLI score of DHX9 (ie 1.0) in a large cohort of …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[3] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as … for this phenotype: the MSL2associated neurodevelopmental … DHX9 is used as the loading control. Immunoblotting on …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[4] De novo mutations in MSL3 cause an X-linked syndrome marked by impaired histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation
    MF Basilicata, AL Bruel, G Semplicio, CIK Valsecchi… (2018)
    PMID:30224647 DOI:10.1038/s41588-018-0220-y https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-018-0220-y
    snippet: … DHX9 serves as input loading control. The experiment was … Common features across the 16 patients include hypotonia, … a complex phenotype including neurodevelopmental delay, with …
    abstract: The etiological spectrum of ultra-rare developmental disorders remains to be fully defined. Chromatin regulatory mechanisms maintain cellular identity and function, where misregulation may lead to developmental defects. Here, we report pathogenic variations in MSL3, which encodes a member of the chromatin-associated male-specific lethal (MSL) complex responsible for bulk histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac) in flies and mammals. These variants cause an X-linked syndrome affecting both sexes. Clinical features of the syndrome include global developmental delay, progressive gait disturbance, and recognizable facial dysmorphism. MSL3 mutations affect MSL complex assembly and activity, accompanied by a pronounced loss of H4K16ac levels in vivo. Patient-derived cells display global transcriptome alterations of pathways involved in morphogenesis and cell migration. Finally, we use histone deacetylase inhibitors to rebalance acetylation levels, alleviating some of the molecular and cellular phenotypes of patient cells. Taken together, we characterize a syndrome that allowed us to decipher the developmental importance of MSL3 in humans.

[5] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 variants is also beginning to emerge [27,28]. Clinical … Second, genotype–phenotype correlations from cohorts of patients with variants …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[6] 620988 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620988
    snippet: 3 · Neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia, speech delay, and dysmorphic facies ... Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated ...

[7] DHX9 gene DExH-Box Helicase 9
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/DHX9
    snippet: These findings place DHX9 in both neurodevelopmental and ... Rare *MAGEL2*-related neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia, contractures, and autism.

[8] Rare De Novo Missense Variants in RNA Helicase DDX6 Cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:31422817 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.07.010 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Rare-De-Novo-Missense-Variants-in-RNA-Helicase-DDX6-Balak-Benard/2f96fcd2652cb352a456ae6156ce6b1c1935ccae
    snippet: Clinical and molecular data are reported to describe a neurodevelopmental ... Neurodevelopmental Delay, Short Stature, and Congenital Hypotonia ... DHX9 is ...
    abstract: The human RNA helicase DDX6 is an essential component of membrane-less organelles called processing bodies (PBs). PBs are involved in mRNA metabolic processes including translational repression via coordinated storage of mRNAs. Previous studies in human cell lines have implicated altered DDX6 in molecular and cellular dysfunction, but clinical consequences and pathogenesis in humans have yet to be described. Here, we report the identification of five rare de novo missense variants in DDX6 in probands presenting with intellectual disability, developmental delay, and similar dysmorphic features including telecanthus, epicanthus, arched eyebrows, and low-set ears. All five missense variants (p.His372Arg, p.Arg373Gln, p.Cys390Arg, p.Thr391Ile, and p.Thr391Pro) are located in two conserved motifs of the RecA-2 domain of DDX6 involved in RNA binding, helicase activity, and protein-partner binding. We use functional studies to demonstrate that the first variants identified (p.Arg373Gln and p.Cys390Arg) cause significant defects in PB assembly in primary fibroblast and model human cell lines. These variants' interactions with several protein partners were also disrupted in immunoprecipitation assays. Further investigation via complementation assays included the additional variants p.Thr391Ile and p.Thr391Pro, both of which, similarly to p.Arg373Gln and p.Cys390Arg, demonstrated significant defects in P-body assembly. Complementing these molecular findings, modeling of the variants on solved protein structures showed distinct spatial clustering near known protein binding regions. Collectively, our clinical and molecular data describe a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with pathogenic missense variants in DDX6. Additionally, we suggest DDX6 join the DExD/H-box genes DDX3X and DHX30 in an emerging class of neurodevelopmental disorders involving RNA helicases.

[9] The epilepsy–autism phenotype associated with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies: New mechanism‐based therapeutic options
    N Specchio, V Di Micco, E Aronica, S Auvin… (2025)
    DOI:10.1111/epi.18209 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/epi.18209
    snippet: … The prevalence of epilepsy in individuals with autism, and vice … delay, ID, dysmorphisms, abnormal head size, hypotonia, ASD … pathogenic DHX9 variants cause abnormal DHX9 cellular …
    abstract: Epilepsy and autism often co-occur in genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs), but their underlying neurobiological processes remain poorly understood, complicating treatment. Advances in molecular genetics and understanding the neurodevelopmental pathogenesis of the epilepsy-autism phenotype may lead to mechanism-based treatments for children with DEEs and autism. Several genes, including the newly reported PPFIA3, MYCBP2, DHX9, TMEM63B, and RELN, are linked to various neurodevelopmental and epileptic disorders, intellectual disabilities, and autistic features. These findings underscore the clinical heterogeneity of genetic DEEs and suggest diverse neurobiological mechanisms influenced by genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. Mechanisms linking epilepsy and autism include γ-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) signaling dysregulation, synaptic plasticity, disrupted functional connectivity, and neuroinflammatory responses. GABA system abnormalities, critical for inhibitory neurotransmission, contribute to both conditions. Dysregulation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and neuroinflammation are also pivotal, affecting seizure generation, drug resistance, and neuropsychiatric comorbidities. Abnormal synaptic function and connectivity further underscore the epilepsy-autism phenotype. New treatment options targeting specific mechanisms linked to the epilepsy-autism phenotype are emerging. Genetic variants in potassium channel genes like KCNQ2 and KCNT1 are frequent causes of early onset DEEs. Personalized treatments like retigabine and quinidine have been explored with heterogeneous responses. Efforts are ongoing to develop more effective KCNQ activators and KCNT1 blockers. SCN1A genetic variants, particularly in Dravet syndrome, show potential for treatment of autistic symptoms with low-dose clonazepam, fenfluramine, and cannabidiol, although human trials have yet to consistently replicate animal model successes. Early intervention before the age of 3 years, particularly in SCN1A- and tuberous sclerosis complex-related DEEs, is crucial. Additionally, targeting the mTOR pathway shows promise for seizure control and managing epilepsy-associated comorbidities. Understanding the distinct autism spectrum disorder phenotype in DEEs and implementing early behavioral interventions are essential for improving outcomes. Despite genetic advances, significant challenges persist in diagnosing and treating DEE-associated epi

[10] Paralog studies augment gene discovery: DDX and DHX genes
    I Paine, JE Posey, CM Grochowski… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30226-5
    snippet: … To date, at least 75 individuals have been reported to have … file, we extracted the B-allele frequency (ie, ratio of variant reads/… 8) presented with severe hypotonia and joint contractures, …
    abstract: Members of a paralogous gene family in which variation in one gene is known to cause disease are eight times more likely to also be associated with human disease. Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in paralogous genes encoding members of the DExD/H-box RNA helicase superfamily might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease phenotypes. Here we describe 15 unrelated individuals who have DD and/or ID, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H-box RNA helicase genes. In addition, these individuals exhibit a variety of other tissue and organ system involvement including ocular, outer ear, hearing, cardiac, and kidney tissues. Five individuals with homozygous (one), compound-heterozygous (two), or de novo (two) missense variants in DHX37 were identified by exome sequencing. We identified ten total individuals with missense variants in three other DDX/DHX paralogs: DHX16 (four individuals), DDX54 (three individuals), and DHX34 (three individuals). Most identified variants are rare, predicted to be damaging, and occur at conserved amino acid residues. Taken together, these 15 individuals implicate the DExD/H-box helicases in both dominantly and recessively inherited neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlight the potential for more than one disease mechanism underlying these disorders.