SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present… ocular phenotypes were not assessed in Kdm2b ΔCxxC animals, ~40% of mouse embryos lacking full-length Kdm2b …
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[2] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series Supporting the CxxC Domain Phenotype With Emphasis on Ocular and Dermatologic Features
    A Gomes, Á Martín‐Rodríguez… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: … in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of … septal defects and unilateral renal agenesis. When integrated with published data, these …
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[3] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B‐Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder and the 12q24. 31 Microdeletion Syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, TC Hsieh, M Koetsier… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70169
    snippet: … renal and ocular abnormalities (OMIM # 621474) [14]. … genotype–phenotype correlations of the KDM2B- associated … These clinical features are highly consistent with those of the …
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[4] A novel frameshift variant in BCOR causes congenital nuclear cataract
    V Berry, MB Ponnekanti, N Pontikos… (2024)
    PMID:38957147 DOI:10.1080/13816810.2024.2373248 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13816810.2024.2373248
    snippet: … lens, can be a stand-alone phenotype or a part of a constellation of ocular defects. It is also … with both KDM2B and PCGF1. This, we believe, resulted in the lens cataract phenotype in the …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>BCL6 co-repressor (<i>BCOR</i>) gene variants are involved in oculofaciocardiodental (OFCD) syndrome, acute myeloid leukaemia, renal tumours, and photoreceptor degenerative diseases. Here, we describe a British family with a pathogenic heterozygous variant in the <i>BCOR</i> gene causing congenital nuclear cataract.<h4>Methods</h4>Whole-exome sequencing was conducted on an individual affected by X-linked dominant congenital cataract in a three-generation family to establish the underlying genetic basis. Bioinformatics analysis confirmed the variants with damaging pathogenicity scores.<h4>Results</h4>A novel likely pathogenic frameshift variant <i>BCOR</i> NM_001123385.1: c.3621del; p.Lys1207AsnfsTer31, was identified and found to co-segregate with the disease in this family.<h4>Conclusions</h4>This is apparently the first report of a variant in <i>BCOR</i> causing X-linked dominant congenital cataract which is potentially isolated or presenting with a remarkably mild systemic phenotype. Our findings extend the genetic basis for congenital cataract and add to the phenotypic spectrum of <i>BCOR</i> variants.

[5] Targeting epigenetic regulators as a promising avenue to overcome cancer therapy resistance
    J Song, P Yang, C Chen, W Ding, O Tillement… (2025)
    PMID:40675967 DOI:10.1038/s41392-025-02266-z https://www.nature.com/articles/s41392-025-02266-z
    snippet: … Among the various epigenetic modifications present in tumors, identifying which one is the core driver of malignant phenotypes is the most critical concern in clinical practice. …
    abstract: Cancer remains one of the leading health threats globally, with therapeutic resistance being a long-standing challenge across chemotherapy, radiotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. In recent years, the association between epigenetic modification abnormalities and therapeutic resistance in tumors has garnered widespread attention, spurring interest in the development of approaches to target epigenetic factors. In this review, we explore the widespread dysregulation and crosstalk of various types of epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation, histone modifications, and non-coding RNA changes, which interact through complex regulatory networks in tumors. Clinically, single-targeted therapy based on epigenetic modification usually has its limited effect against cancer. However, the combination of epigenetic drugs with other treatment modalities, such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy, shows potential for synergistically enhancing efficacy and reducing drug resistance. Therefore, we evaluate the possibility and potential mechanisms of targeting epigenetic modifications to overcome resistance in cancer therapy, and discuss the challenges and opportunities in moving epigenetic therapy into clinical practice. Moreover, the application of multi-omics technologies will aid in identifying core epigenetic factors from complex epigenetic networks, enabling precision treatment and overcoming therapeutic resistance in tumors. Furthermore, the development of spatial multi-omics technologies, by providing spatial coordinates of cellular and molecular heterogeneity, revolutionizes our understanding of the tumor microenvironment, offering new perspectives for precision therapy. In summary, the combined application of epigenetic therapies and the integration of multi-omics technologies herald a new direction for cancer treatment, holding the potential to achieve more effective personalized treatment strategies.

[6] Entry - #621474 - NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621474
    snippet: ... KDM2B gene (609078) on chromosome 12q24. ▽ Description. Neurodevelopmental ... More variable features include renal defects (i.e., single kidney), ocular ...

[7] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC13247248 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13247248/
    snippet: by F Ceroni · 2026 · Cited by 1 — Both displayed complex structural eye disorders and extra-ocular features consistent with those previously reported in KDM2B-CxxC cases. Subjects and ...
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[8] Facial characteristics of individuals with KDM2B ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Facial-characteristics-of-individuals-with-KDM2B-pathogenic-variants-A-C-Individuals-of_fig2_365038619
    snippet: ... renal and ocular abnormalities (OMIM # 621474) [14]. ... ... Pathogenic variants in SETD1B have been associated with an NDD (MIM 619000) [24]. For both KDM2B ...

[9] KDM2B gene Lysine Demethylase 2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/KDM2B
    snippet: Diseases associated with KDM2B include Neurodevelopmental Disorder With Congenital Cardiac Defects And Variable Renal And Ocular Abnormalities and Hematologic ...

[10] KDM2B variants in the CxxC domain impair its DNA-binding ability and cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, MA Hadders… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/34/16/1353/8150966
    snippet: … encodes the 1336 amino acid lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B; OMIM 609078), which … suggest KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder …
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.