SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6‐2‐related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, M Alsagob, K Kloth… (2020)
    DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ene.14082
    snippet: … The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown … epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[2] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies—Unravelling myelin biology
    NI Wolf, C Ffrench (2021)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41582-020-00432-1
    snippet: … in genetic diagnosis of hypomyelination and the insights into … Truncating variants in NKX6-2 cause a severe form of PMLD, … hypomyelination, some patients have severe epilepsy, …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies constitute a subset of genetic white matter disorders characterized by a primary lack of myelin deposition. Most patients with severe hypomyelination present in infancy or early childhood and develop severe neurological deficits, but the clinical presentation can also be mild with onset of symptoms in adolescence or adulthood. MRI can be used to visualize the process of myelination in detail, and MRI pattern recognition can provide a clinical diagnosis in many patients. Next-generation sequencing provides a definitive diagnosis in 80-90% of patients. Genes associated with hypomyelination include those that encode structural myelin proteins but also many that encode proteins involved in RNA translation and some lysosomal proteins. The precise pathomechanisms remain to be elucidated. Improved understanding of the process of myelination, the metabolic axonal support functions of myelin and the proposed contribution of myelin to CNS plasticity provide possible explanations as to why almost all patients with hypomyelination experience slow clinical decline after a long phase of stability. In this Review, we provide an overview of the hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, the advances in our understanding of myelin biology and of the genes involved in these disorders, and the insights these advances have provided into their clinical presentations and evolution.

[3] NKX6-2-related disorder
    V Chelban, N Kaya, F Alkuraya, H Houlden (2018)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk531509/
    snippet: … Normal to hyperintense T 1 -weighted white matter signal suggestive of hypomyelination observed in areas corresponding to the T 2 -weighted hyperintense signal change (column 2) …

[4] Transcriptomic profiling of high-and low-spiking regions reveals novel epileptogenic mechanisms in focal cortical dysplasia type II patients
    A Srivastava, K Kumar, J Banerjee, M Tripathi, V Dubey… (2021)
    DOI:10.1186/s13041-021-00832-4 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13041-021-00832-4
    snippet: … -epilepsy controls for such studies involving epilepsy surgery, … without any history of seizures or other neurological disorders … MOG, NKX6-2 and MOBP) were found to be significantly up-…
    abstract: Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) is a malformation of the cerebral cortex with poorly-defined epileptogenic zones (EZs), and poor surgical outcome in FCD is associated with inaccurate localization of the EZ. Hence, identifying novel epileptogenic markers to aid in the localization of EZ in patients with FCD is very much needed. High-throughput gene expression studies of FCD samples have the potential to uncover molecular changes underlying the epileptogenic process and identify novel markers for delineating the EZ. For this purpose, we, for the first time performed RNA sequencing of surgically resected paired tissue samples obtained from electrocorticographically graded high (MAX) and low spiking (MIN) regions of FCD type II patients and autopsy controls. We identified significant changes in the MAX samples of the FCD type II patients when compared to non-epileptic controls, but not in the case of MIN samples. We found significant enrichment for myelination, oligodendrocyte development and differentiation, neuronal and axon ensheathment, phospholipid metabolism, cell adhesion and cytoskeleton, semaphorins, and ion channels in the MAX region. Through the integration of both MAX vs non-epileptic control and MAX vs MIN RNA sequencing (RNA Seq) data, PLP1, PLLP, UGT8, KLK6, SOX10, MOG, MAG, MOBP, ANLN, ERMN, SPP1, CLDN11, TNC, GPR37, SLC12A2, ABCA2, ABCA8, ASPA, P2RX7, CERS2, MAP4K4, TF, CTGF, Semaphorins, Opalin, FGFs, CALB2, and TNC were identified as potential key regulators of multiple pathways related to FCD type II pathology. We have identified novel epileptogenic marker elements that may contribute to epileptogenicity in patients with FCD and could be possible markers for the localization of EZ.

[5] Viorica Chelban,* Nisha Patel, 2, 15 Jana Vandrovcova, M. Natalia Zanetti, 3 David S. Lynch, Mina Ryten, 9, 11 Juan A. Botıa, 9, 10 Oscar Bello, 3 Eloise …
    JE Rothman, FS Alkuraya, H Houlden (2017)
    https://iris.unime.it/retrieve/handle/11570/3133952/221414/NKX6.pdf
    snippet: … NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination… features, such as epilepsy, cognitive decline…

[6] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2 ... - PubMed
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31509304/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2020 · Cited by 34 — The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and ...
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[7] Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30196-9
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 66 — Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia and Hypomyelination ... epilepsy, cognitive decline, dystonia, and hypomyelination on MRI.
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[8] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy – NKX6–2 gene variant ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666459321000056
    snippet: by P Guder · 2021 · Cited by 3 — Microcephaly, growth retardation, failure to thrive, dysmorphism, epilepsy ... Ryten, et al. Mutations in NKX6-2 cause progressive spastic ataxia and ...

[9] Mutations in nkx6-2 cause progressive spastic-ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.jns-journal.com/article/S0022-510X(17)30964-4/fulltext
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 65 — The third family had a similar but very early-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. NKX6-2 is a transcriptional repressor ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[10] A diagnostic approach to spastic ataxia syndromes
    JL Pedroso, TC Vale, MC França Junior, MA Kauffman… (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/s12311-021-01345-5 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12311-021-01345-5
    snippet: … Neuroimaging features in ARSACS include horizontal hypointense signal in the pons … in NKX6–2 gene develop autosomal recessive spastic ataxia with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy…
    abstract: Spastic ataxia is characterized by the combination of cerebellar ataxia with spasticity and other pyramidal features. It is the hallmark of some hereditary ataxias, but it can also occur in some spastic paraplegias and acquired conditions. It often presents with heterogenous clinical features with other neurologic and non-neurological symptoms, resulting in complex phenotypes. In this review, the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxias are discussed and classified in accordance with inheritance. Establishing an organized classification method based on mode inheritance is fundamental for the approach to patients with these syndromes. For each differential, the clinical features, neuroimaging and genetic aspects are reviewed. A diagnostic approach for spastic ataxias is then proposed.