SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, … behavioral abnormalities commonly seen in our cohort.…
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs neurogenesis, and alters histone H4K16 acetylation
    S Luo, S Qu, S Tan, Z Song, Y Lv, X Jia, J Tan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf
    snippet: … disorder (64.3%), while MSL3 variants were predominantly associated with feeding difficulties (81.3%) and hypotonia … that Msl2 ablation in mice recapitulates key behavioral phenotypes …

[3] Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
    X Lu, K Ng, F Pinto e Vairo, J Collins, R Cohn… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01576-0
    snippet: … We reported first time the detailed clinical features associated with 3 MSL2 PTVs. There are … causal role of MSL2 in a likely syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder and add MSL2 to a …
    abstract: Numerous large scale genomic studies have uncovered rare but recurrent pathogenetic variants in a significant number of genes encoding epigenetic machinery in cases with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) especially autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These findings provide strong support for the functional importance of epigenetic regulators in neurodevelopment. After the clinical genomics evaluation of the patients using exome sequencing, we have identified, three novel protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the MSL2 gene (OMIM: 614802) which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme. MSL2 modifies chromatin through both mono-ubiquitination of histone 2B on lysine 34 (K34) and acetylation of histone H4 on lysine 16 (K16). We reported first time the detailed clinical features associated with 3 MSL2 PTVs. There are 15 PTVs (13 de novo) reported from the large genomics studies (12 cases) or ClinVar (3 cases) of NDD, ASD, and developmental disorders (DD) but the specific clinical features for these cases are not described. Taken together, our descriptions of dysmorphic face and other features support the causal role of MSL2 in a likely syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder and add MSL2 to a growing list of epigenetic genes implicated in ASD.

[4] Chromosomal microarray analysis in Turkish patients with unexplained developmental delay and intellectual developmental disorders
    H Gürkan, EI Atli, E Atli, L Bozatli… (2020)
    PMC7481981 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7481981/
    snippet: … In our 1-year-old patient with IDD, hypotonia, brachycephaly, bilateral epicanthus, ptosis and speech disorder, we found a 3567 kb deletion in the chromosome 3q22.2-q22.3 region and …
    abstract: <h4>Introduction</h4>Aneuploids, copy number variations (CNVs), and single nucleotide variants in specific genes are the main genetic causes of developmental delay (DD) and intellectual disability disorder (IDD). These genetic changes can be detected using chromosome analysis, chromosomal microarray (CMA), and next-generation DNA sequencing techniques. Therefore; In this study, we aimed to investigate the importance of CMA in determining the genomic etiology of unexplained DD and IDD in 123 patients.<h4>Method</h4>For 123 patients, chromosome analysis, DNA fragment analysis and microarray were performed. Conventional G-band karyotype analysis from peripheral blood was performed as part of the initial screening tests. FMR1 gene CGG repeat number and methylation analysis were carried out to exclude fragile X syndrome.<h4>Results</h4>CMA analysis was performed in 123 unexplained IDD/DD patients with normal karyotypes and fragile X screening, which were evaluated by conventional cytogenetics. Forty-four CNVs were detected in 39 (39/123=31.7%) patients. Twelve CNV variant of unknown significance (VUS) (9.75%) patients and 7 CNV benign (5.69%) patients were reported. In 6 patients, one or more pathogenic CNVs were determined. Therefore, the diagnostic efficiency of CMA was found to be 31.7% (39/123).<h4>Conclusion</h4>Today, genetic analysis is still not part of the routine in the evaluation of IDD patients who present to psychiatry clinics. A genetic diagnosis from CMA can eliminate genetic question marks and thus alter the clinical management of patients. Approximately one-third of the positive CMA findings are clinically intervenable. However, the emergence of CNVs as important risk factors for multiple disorders increases the need for individuals with comorbid neurodevelopmental conditions to be the priority where the CMA test is recommended.

[5] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … , rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain … of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice … Behavioral disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder, …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[6] MSL2
    (authors not shown)
    https://humandiseasegenes.nl/msl2
    snippet: ... MSL2 gene. KBHS is a multisystem disorder characterized by global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia ... behavioral ...

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://discovery.geisinger.org/esploro/outputs/journalArticle/MSL2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental/9915304209631
    snippet: ... hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination ... MSL2 neurodevelopmental syndrome ... Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: Twenty-one patients had motor delay, 18 had speech delay, 11 had coordination abnormalities, and 18 had hypotonia. Nine patients had seizures ...

[9] Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/karayol_borroto_haghshenas_neurodevelopmental_syndrome
    snippet: 122 Human Phenotypes for Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas Neurodevelopmental Syndrome: ; 4, hypotonia · HP:0001252, Very rare (1%) ; 5, epileptic spasm · HP:0011097, Very ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholars.duke.edu/individual/pub1633872
    snippet: MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.