SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder … families with biallelic truncating variants in FILIP1. Two of … identical homozygous VPS36 missense variant (NM_016075.…
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[2] Myofibrillar myopathy: towards a mechanism-based definition as a Z-disk-opathy
    M Inoue, CC Weihl (2025)
    PMC12354002 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12354002/
    snippet: … , recessive missense mutations in the J domain cause an even more severe clinical phenotype … [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]; This paper identifies biallelic FILIP1 …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose of review</h4>Myofibrillar myopathies (MFMs) are traditionally defined by histopathology, but recent genetic discoveries have broadened the spectrum of causative genes beyond Z-disk components. This review aims to address the resulting terminological inconsistency by proposing a refined, mechanism-based definition of MFM centered on its identity as a "Z-disk-opathy." This re-evaluation is timely and relevant for improving diagnostic clarity and guiding future research.<h4>Recent findings</h4>The literature increasingly reports MFM-like pathology in conditions caused by mutations in genes not directly encoding Z-disk structural proteins or their interacting chaperones. This review highlights the pathogenic mechanisms distinguishing true MFMs, which involve disruption of Z-disk protein structure or Z-disk protein homeostasis, from "myopathies with MFM pathology" that share histological features but stem from different molecular etiologies. Key themes include the dominant nature of mutations in Z-disk structural proteins and the critical role of chaperone dysfunction in MFM pathogenesis.<h4>Summary</h4>A refined definition classifying MFM as a "Z-disk-opathy" offers a clearer framework for diagnosis and mechanistic understanding. This distinction has significant implications for clinical practice, facilitating more accurate diagnosis, and for research, by supporting the development of targeted therapeutic strategies aimed at either restoring Z-disk proteostasis or mitigating the effects of aberrant protein accumulation.

[3] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a … phenotype in five patients from three unrelated families characterized by variable severity of …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[4] Protein phosphatase-1 regulates the binding of filamin C to FILIP1 in cultured skeletal muscle cells under mechanical stress
    T Kokot, JP Zimmermann, AN Schwäble, L Reimann… (2024)
    PMID:39521905 DOI:10.1038/s41598-024-78953-8 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-78953-8
    snippet: … Consistently, aggregated FLNc co-localized with FILIP1 missense variant in damaged patient muscle tissue, which showed that FLNc degradation was impaired82. These findings …
    abstract: The actin-binding protein filamin c (FLNc) is a key mediator in the response of skeletal muscle cells to mechanical stress. In addition to its function as a structural scaffold, FLNc acts as a signaling adaptor which is phosphorylated at S2234 in its mechanosensitive domain 20 (d20) through AKT. Here, we discovered a strong dephosphorylation of FLNc-pS2234 in cultured skeletal myotubes under acute mechanical stress, despite high AKT activity. We found that all three protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) isoforms are part of the FLNc d18-21 interactome. Enzymatic assays demonstrate that PP1 efficiently dephosphorylates FLNc-pS2234 and in vitro and in cells upon PP1 activation using specific modulators. FLNc-pS2234 dephosphorylation promotes the interaction with FILIP1, a mediator for filamin degradation. Altogether, we present a model in which dephosphorylation of FLNc d20 by the dominant action of PP1c prevails over AKT activity to promote the binding of the filamin degradation-inducing factor FILIP1 during acute mechanical stress.

[5] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2022)
    https://europepmc.org/article/ppr/ppr556969
    snippet: … In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a … phenotype in five patients from three unrelated families characterized by variable severity of …
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[6] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10060356 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10060356/
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 are not observed in healthy control individuals. ... missense variants an additional arthrogryposis phenotype was ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[7] Truncating variant burden in high-functioning autism and ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:31094488 DOI:10.1503/jpn.180184 https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/10.1503/jpn.180184
    snippet: ZNF551, FILIP1, IGSF22, CLTCL1, MYH7B, CACNA1S, MUC17, VPS13C, LRP1 ... The selection of variants includes missense, truncating variants and splice ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Previous research has implicated de novo and inherited truncating mutations in autism-spectrum disorder. We aim to investigate whether the load of inherited truncating mutations contributes similarly to high-functioning autism, and to characterize genes that harbour de novo variants in high-functioning autism.<h4>Methods</h4>We performed whole-exome sequencing in 20 high-functioning autism families (average IQ = 100).<h4>Results</h4>We observed no difference in the number of transmitted versus nontransmitted truncating alleles for high-functioning autism (117 v. 130, p = 0.78). Transmitted truncating and de novo variants in high-functioning autism were not enriched in gene ontology (GO) or Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) categories, or in autism-related gene sets. However, in a patient with high-functioning autism we identified a de novo variant in a canonical splice site of LRP1, a postsynaptic density gene that is a target for fragile X mental retardation protein (FRMP). This de novo variant leads to in-frame skipping of exon 29, removing 2 of 6 blades of the β-propeller domain 4 of LRP1, with putative functional consequences. Large data sets implicate LRP1 across a number of psychiatric disorders: de novo variants are associated with autism-spectrum disorder (p = 0.039) and schizophrenia (p = 0.008) from combined sequencing projects; common variants using genome-wide association study data sets from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium show gene-based association in schizophrenia (p = 6.6 × E−07) and in a meta-analysis across 7 psychiatric disorders (p = 2.3 × E−03); and the burden of ultra-rare pathogenic variants has been shown to be higher in autism-spectrum disorder (p = 1.2 × E−05), using whole-exome sequencing from 6135 patients with schizophrenia, 1778 patients with autism-spectrum disorder and 7875 controls.<h4>Limitations</h4>We had a limited sample of patients with high-functioning autism, related to difficulty in recruiting probands with high cognitive performance and no family history of psychiatric disorders.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Previous studies and ours suggest an effect of truncating mutations restricted to severe autism-spectrum disorder phenotypes that are associated with intellectual disability. We provide evidence for pleiotropic effects of common and rare variants in the LRP1 gene across psychiatric phenotypes.

[8] ROD2 domain filamin C missense mutations exhibit a distinctive ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:35952944 DOI:10.1016/j.rec.2022.08.002 https://ouci.dntb.gov.ua/en/works/7W551Azl/
    snippet: ... Missense Mutations in the FLNC Gene Causing ... Truncating FLNC Mutations Are Associated With ... FILIP1-mediated degradation of FLNC, Commun Biol ...
    abstract: <h4>Introduction and objectives</h4>Missense mutations in the filamin C (FLNC) gene have been reported as cause of inherited cardiomyopathy. Knowledge of the pathogenicity and genotype-phenotype correlation remains scarce. Our aim was to describe a distinctive cardiac phenotype related to rare missense FLNC variants in the ROD2 domain.<h4>Methods</h4>We recruited 21 unrelated families genetically evaluated because of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)/restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) phenotype carrying rare missense variants in the ROD2 domain of FLNC (FLNC-mRod2). Carriers underwent advanced cardiac imaging and genetic cascade screening. Myocardial tissue from 3 explanted hearts of a missense FLNC carrier was histologically analyzed and compared with an FLNC-truncating variant heart sample and a healthy control. Plasmids independently containing 3 FLNC missense variants were transfected and analyzed using confocal microscopy.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven families (52%) with 20 assessed individuals (37 [23.7-52.7]) years showed 15 cases with a cardiac phenotype consisting of an overlap of HCM-RCM and left ventricular hypertrabeculation (saw-tooth appearance). During a median follow-up of 6.49 years, they presented with advanced heart failure: 16 (80%) diastolic dysfunction, 3 heart transplants, 3 heart failure deaths) and absence of cardiac conduction disturbances or skeletal myopathy. A total of 6 families had moderate genotype-phenotype segregation, and the remaining were de novo variants. Differential extracellular matrix remodeling and FLNC distribution among cardiomyocytes were confirmed on histology. HT1080 and H9c2 cells did not reveal cytoplasmic aggregation of mutant FLNC.<h4>Conclusions</h4>FLNC-mRod2 variants show a high prevalence of an overlapped phenotype comprising RCM, HCM and deep hypertrabeculation with saw-tooth appearance and distinctive cardiac histopathological remodeling.

[9] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … or myopathic arthrogryposis. As … truncating variants in FILIP1, we identified Family 2, which comprised two sisters recruited to the 100kGP under the indications of congenital myopathy …

[10] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). … , FLNC and FILIP1 patients share the myopathic phenotype, … FLNC- and FILIP1-associated myopathies are associated …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.