SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] CADASIL or NOTCH3 mutaion spectrum diseases? Interpretation of NOTCH3 mutations and clinical heterogeneity in CADASIL
    Y Wang, Y Liu, H Mo, Y Han, Y Jing, F Deng (2025)
    DOI:10.3389/fneur.2025.1662012/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neurology/articles/10.3389/fneur.2025.1662012/full
    snippet: … with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) … , whereas anterior temporal pole and external capsule white … In addition to this, patients with a homozygous NOTCH3 …

[2] Update on the epidemiology, pathogenesis, and biomarkers of cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
    Y Yamamoto, YC Liao, YC Lee… (2023)
    PMC9833879 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9833879/
    snippet: … , 48 , 49 The homozygous p.Arg544Cys mutation has been reported in a Japanese patient … )2 of the NOTCH3 protein; (B and C) variable severity of WMHs without anterior temporal pole …
    abstract: Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is the most common monogenic disorder of the cerebral small blood vessels. It is caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene on chromosome 19, and more than 280 distinct pathogenic mutations have been reported to date. CADASIL was once considered a very rare disease with an estimated prevalence of 1.3-4.1 per 100,000 adults. However, recent large-scale genomic studies have revealed a high prevalence of pathogenic <i>NOTCH3</i> variants among the general population, with the highest risk being among Asians. The disease severity and age at onset vary significantly even among individuals who carry the same <i>NOTCH3</i> mutations. It is still unclear whether a significant genotype-phenotype correlation is present in CADASIL. The accumulation of granular osmiophilic material in the vasculature is a characteristic feature of CADASIL. However, the exact pathogenesis of CADASIL remains largely unclear despite various laboratory and clinical observations being made. Major hypotheses proposed so far have included aberrant NOTCH3 signaling, toxic aggregation, and abnormal matrisomes. Several characteristic features have been observed in the brain magnetic resonance images of patients with CADASIL, including subcortical lacunar lesions and white matter hyperintensities in the anterior temporal lobe or external capsule, which were useful in differentiating CADASIL from sporadic stroke in patients. The number of lacunes and the degree of brain atrophy were useful in predicting the clinical outcomes of patients with CADASIL. Several promising blood biomarkers have also recently been discovered for CADASIL, which require further research for validation.

[3] Mechanistic advances in factors influencing phenotypic variability in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy: a …
    Y Zhao, YR Lu, FY Wang, YD Wang, YQ Li… (2025)
    DOI:10.3389/fneur.2025.1573052/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neurology/articles/10.3389/fneur.2025.1573052/full
    snippet: … , temporal pole, … the NOTCH3 gene; however, homozygous mutations have also been identified. Compared with age-matched CADASIL patients with the R133C mutation, homozygous …

[4] Clinical and genetic characterization of leukoencephalopathies in adults
    DS Lynch, A Rodrigues Brandão de Paiva, WJ Zhang… (2017)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/140/5/1204/3060041
    snippet: … a leukoencephalopathy with ovarian failure and NOTCH3, … P1 not showing temporal pole abnormalities on imaging … We identified a novel homozygous nonsense mutation in RNF216 in …
    abstract: Leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies are a rare group of disorders leading to progressive degeneration of cerebral white matter. They are associated with a spectrum of clinical phenotypes dominated by dementia, psychiatric changes, movement disorders and upper motor neuron signs. Mutations in at least 60 genes can lead to leukoencephalopathy with often overlapping clinical and radiological presentations. For these reasons, patients with genetic leukoencephalopathies often endure a long diagnostic odyssey before receiving a definitive diagnosis or may receive no diagnosis at all. In this study, we used focused and whole exome sequencing to evaluate a cohort of undiagnosed adult patients referred to a specialist leukoencephalopathy service. In total, 100 patients were evaluated using focused exome sequencing of 6100 genes. We detected pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 26 cases. The most frequently mutated genes were NOTCH3, EIF2B5, AARS2 and CSF1R. We then carried out whole exome sequencing on the remaining negative cases including four family trios, but could not identify any further potentially disease-causing mutations, confirming the equivalence of focused and whole exome sequencing in the diagnosis of genetic leukoencephalopathies. Here we provide an overview of the clinical and genetic features of these disorders in adults.

[5] Genetic analysis of adult leukoencephalopathy patients using a custom‐designed gene panel
    M Kunii, H Doi, Y Ishii, C Ohba, K Tanaka… (2018)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.13371 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13371
    snippet: … Ala222Val) in MTHFR because the homozygous C677T polymorphism increases the risk of … temporal pole white matter lesions, as in our patient. Thus, it should be noted that NOTCH3 …
    abstract: Leukoencephalopathies encompass all clinical syndromes that predominantly affect brain white matter. Genetic diagnosis informs clinical management of these patients, but a large part of the genetic contribution to adult leukoencephalopathy remains unresolved. To examine this genetic contribution, we analyzed genomic DNA from 60 Japanese patients with adult leukoencephalopathy of unknown cause by next generation sequencing using a custom-designed gene panel. We selected 55 leukoencephalopathy-related genes for the gene panel. We identified pathogenic mutations in 8 of the 60 adult leukoencephalopathy patients (13.3%): NOTCH3 mutations were detected in 5 patients, and EIF2B2, CSF1R, and POLR3A mutations were found independently in 1 patient each. These results indicate that cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) caused by NOTCH3 mutations is the most frequent adult leukoencephalopathy in our cohort. Moreover, brain imaging analysis indicates that CADASIL patients who do not present typical phenotypes may be underdiagnosed if not examined genetically.

[6] A novel homozygous loss-of-function NOTCH3 variant in a Moroccan patient: expanding the spectrum beyond CADASIL
    A Ouskri, H Ihlal, Z En (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s10048-025-00862-3 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10048-025-00862-3
    snippet: … within the deep and periventricular white matter, without diffusion restriction, reflecting a … of white matter lesions, or “sunburst appearance,” described in NOTCH3 loss-of-function …
    abstract: NOTCH3, a key regulator of vascular smooth muscle cell function within the Notch signaling pathway, is essential for maintaining small artery integrity, especially in cerebral microvasculature. Pathogenic heterozygous missense variants in NOTCH3 cause CADASIL, an autosomal dominant small-vessel disease marked by extracellular domain aggregation, granular osmiophilic material deposition, and vascular smooth muscle cell dysfunction, leading to early-onset ischemic strokes, migraine with aura, and progressive cognitive decline. We report a 12-year-old Moroccan girl, born to first-degree consanguineous parents, presenting with global developmental delay, spastic tetraparesis, epilepsy, and bilateral periventricular white matter abnormalities. Whole-exome sequencing identified a novel homozygous frameshift variant in NOTCH3 (NM_000435.3:c.2985_2991del; NP_000426.2:p.(Gln996ArgfsTer274)), confirmed by Sanger sequencing, with heterozygous carrier parents. Emerging evidence shows that biallelic loss-of-function variants, unlike the gain-of-function variants underlying CADASIL, define a distinct autosomal recessive leukodystrophy characterized by early-onset pyramidal signs, epilepsy, and white matter abnormalities, thereby expanding the phenotypic and molecular spectrum of NOTCH3-related disorders. This work highlights the functional divergence between dominant and recessive NOTCH3 variants and supports the inclusion of NOTCH3 in gene panels for early-onset leukodystrophies, especially in consanguineous populations.

[7] Clinical and molecular genetic findings of cerebral arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
    BS Rüstemoğlu, B Samanci, F Tepgeç… (2021)
    https://www.tjn.org.tr/abstract/159/tur
    snippet: … the disease-associated variant as homozygous in the NOTCH3 … 2.7%) and anterior temporal white matter lesions (89% vs. … Specifically, white matter lesions in the anterior temporal lobe …

[8] Clinical and neuroradiological spectrum of biallelic variants in NOTCH3
    P Iruzubieta, CAPF Alves, AM Al Shamsi… (2024)
    https://www.thelancet.com/journals/ebiom/article/PIIS2352-3964(24)00333-5/fulltext?uuid=uuid%3A96be62e9-7005-4bb8-a3db-0ba3a222ee3a
    snippet: … , and deep white matter lesions without significant volume loss. White matter lesion volume is … variations of biallelic, homozygous, recessive, and NOTCH3. We conducted searches in …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>NOTCH3 encodes a transmembrane receptor critical for vascular smooth muscle cell function. NOTCH3 variants are the leading cause of hereditary cerebral small vessel disease (SVD). While monoallelic cysteine-involving missense variants in NOTCH3 are well-studied in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), patients with biallelic variants in NOTCH3 are extremely rare and not well characterised.<h4>Methods</h4>In this study, we present clinical and genetic data from 25 patients with biallelic NOTCH3 variants and conduct a literature review of another 25 cases (50 patients in total). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were analysed by expert neuroradiologists to better understand the phenotype associated with biallelic NOTCH3 variants.<h4>Findings</h4>Our systematic analyses verified distinct genotype-phenotype correlations for the two types of biallelic variants in NOTCH3. Biallelic loss-of-function variants (26 patients) lead to a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by spasticity, childhood-onset stroke, and periatrial white matter volume loss resembling periventricular leukomalacia. Conversely, patients with biallelic cysteine-involving missense variants (24 patients) fall within CADASIL spectrum phenotype with early adulthood onset stroke, dementia, and deep white matter lesions without significant volume loss. White matter lesion volume is comparable between patients with biallelic cysteine-involving missense variants and individuals with CADASIL. Notably, monoallelic carriers of loss-of-function variants are predominantly asymptomatic, with only a few cases reporting nonspecific headaches.<h4>Interpretation</h4>We propose a NOTCH3-SVD classification depending on dosage and variant type. This study not only expands our knowledge of biallelic NOTCH3 variants but also provides valuable insight into the underlying mechanisms of the disease, contributing to a more comprehensive understanding of NOTCH3-related SVD.<h4>Funding</h4>The Wellcome Trust, the MRC.

[9] Phenotype of a Homozygous CADASIL Patient in Comparison to 9 Age-Matched Heterozygous Patients With the Same R133C Notch3 Mutation
    S Tuominen, V Juvonen, K Amberla, T Jolma, JO Rinne… (2001)
    PMID:11486103 DOI:10.1161/01.STR.32.8.1767 https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1161/01.STR.32.8.1767
    snippet: … The confluent white matter hyperintensities in the homozygous patient’s T2-weighted MRI (a) correspond to the most severe grade D, whereas the changes in the heterozygous …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>CADASIL is an autosomal dominant arteriopathy, characterized by multiple brain infarcts, cognitive decline, and finally dementia, which is caused by mutations in Notch3 gene encoding a Notch3 receptor protein. We describe the clinical, neuropsychological, imaging, genetic, and skin biopsy findings in a CADASIL patient homozygous for the C475T mutation resulting in R133C amino acid substitution, in comparison to 9 age-matched heterozygous patients with the same mutation.<h4>Methods</h4>The patients were examined clinically and neuropsychologically and with MRI and positron emission tomography for assessment of cerebral blood flow. The gene defect was analyzed by sequencing the products of polymerase chain reaction of exons 3 and 4 of the Notch3 gene. Dermal arteries were analyzed electron microscopically.<h4>Results</h4>The homozygous patient had his first-ever stroke at age 28 years. This is markedly earlier than the average, but the patient's heterozygous son had his first transient ischemic attack-like episode at the same age and another heterozygous patient had his first-ever stroke when only 2 years older. He was neuropsychologically more severely deteriorated than all but 1 of the heterozygous patients. These 2 patients had the most severe (confluent grade D) white matter MRI changes. Positron emission tomography showed markedly reduced cerebral blood flow. Skin biopsy revealed profuse deposits of granular osmiophilic material. The progression of disease in the homozygous case was, however, slower than in the most severely affected heterozygous patient.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our homozygous patient's phenotype is within the clinical spectrum of CADASIL, although at its severe end. Thus, CADASIL may follow the classic definition of a dominant disease, according to which the heterozygous and homozygous patients are clinically indistinguishable.

[10] … involved in the onset and progression of cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL); a focus on Notch3 …
    P Heidari, M Taghizadeh, O Vakili (2025)
    DOI:10.1186/s10194-025-02025-z https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s10194-025-02025-z
    snippet: … NOTCH3 variants are frequently present in the general population, but individuals often exhibit a milder SVD phenotype or no indication of white matter disease [… homozygous NOTCH3 …
    abstract: Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an autosomal-dominantly inherited cerebral small-vessel disease (SVD). CADASIL has diverse clinical features such as migraine with aura, dementia, and recurrent strokes, and is caused by a pathogenic mutation in the NOTCH3 gene which encodes a transmembrane receptor found in smooth muscle cells of small arteries and pericytes of brain capillaries. Pathogenic mutations alter the number of cysteine residues in the extracellular domain of NOTCH3, leading to the abnormal accumulation of granular osmiophilic material in the vessels of affected individuals. In addition, potential signaling pathways, such as transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), may be involved in pathogenesis of the disease. This review aims to elucidate these mechanisms, particularly NOTCH3, in the context of CADASIL pathogenesis, providing insight into the role of NOTCH3 signaling and discussing the significance of these pathways for potential future therapeutic interventions in CADASIL patients.