SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … genes listed in Table 1, DDX17, DDX23 and DHX9 show high missense Z scores and pLI’s. … if missense changes located outside the QxxR and the motif V domains and truncating …

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … -rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant … (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated … Truncated DHX9 and NLS variant proteins induced …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] GREGoR: accelerating genomics for rare diseases
    M Dawood, B Heavner, MM Wheeler, RA Ungar… (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09613-8
    snippet: … coding regions most intolerant to missense mutations35,36 and … evade NMD, producing truncated proteins of unknown func… a nonsense variant to a missense or synonymous variant, or …
    abstract: Rare diseases are collectively common, affecting approximately 1 in 20 individuals worldwide. In recent years, rapid progress has been made in rare disease diagnostics due to advances in next-generation sequencing, development of new computational and functional genomics approaches to prioritize genes and variants and increased global sharing of clinical and genetic data. However, more than half of individuals suspected to have a rare disease lack a genetic diagnosis. The Genomics Research to Elucidate the Genetics of Rare Diseases (GREGoR) Consortium was initiated to study thousands of challenging rare disease cases and families and apply, standardize and evaluate emerging genomics technologies and analytics to accelerate their adoption in clinical practice. Furthermore, all data generated, currently representing over 7,500 individuals from over 3,000 families, are rapidly made available to researchers worldwide through the Analysis, Visualization and Informatics Lab-space (AnVIL) to catalyse global efforts to develop approaches for genetic diagnoses in rare diseases. Most of these families have undergone previous clinical genetic testing but remained unsolved, with most being exome-negative. Here we describe the collaborative research framework, datasets and discoveries comprising GREGoR that will provide foundational resources and substrates for the future of rare disease genomics.

[4] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … rare protein-truncating and -damaging missense variants in … , autism, and epilepsy48; a de novo missense variant in an … in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.

[5] Bi-allelic UGGT1 variants cause a congenital disorder of glycosylation
    Z Dardas, L Harrold, DG Calame, CG Salter… (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00139-9
    snippet: … (EEG) indicative of active epilepsy overlying a significant degree … All missense variants are highly conserved from humans to … in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) comprise a large heterogeneous group of metabolic conditions caused by defects in glycoprotein and glycolipid glycan assembly and remodeling, a fundamental molecular process with wide-ranging biological roles. Herein, we describe bi-allelic UGGT1 variants in fifteen individuals from ten unrelated families of various ethnic backgrounds as a cause of a distinctive CDG of variable severity. The cardinal clinical features of UGGT1-CDG involve developmental delay, intellectual disability, seizures, characteristic facial features, and microcephaly in the majority (9/11 affected individuals for whom measurements were available). The more severely affected individuals display congenital heart malformations, variable skeletal abnormalities including scoliosis, and hepatic and renal involvement, including polycystic kidneys mimicking autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. Clinical studies defined genotype-phenotype correlations, showing bi-allelic UGGT1 loss-of-function variants associated with increased disease severity, including death in infancy. UGGT1 encodes UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase 1, an enzyme critical for maintaining quality control of N-linked glycosylation. Molecular studies showed that pathogenic UGGT1 variants impair UGGT1 glucosylation and catalytic activity, disrupt mRNA splicing, or inhibit endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention. Collectively, our data provide a comprehensive genetic, clinical, and molecular characterization of UGGT1-CDG, broadening the spectrum of N-linked glycosylation disorders.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — Calame et al. describe 20 individuals with monoallelic rare damaging DHX9 variants and neurologic phenotypes ranging from severe ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text
    snippet: CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD- ...

[8] Monoallelic variation in DHX9 , the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369072477_Monoallelic_variation_in_DHX9_the_gene_encoding_the_DExH-box_helicase_DHX9_underlies_neurodevelopment_disorders_and_Charcot-Marie-Tooth_disease
    snippet: CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD- ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[9] Entry - *603115 - DExH-BOX HELICASE 9; DHX9
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/603115
    snippet: ... Calame et al. (2023) identified 3 different heterozygous missense variants in the DHX9 gene (D846G, R837T, and A1255T). The variants, which were found by ...

[10] Daniel G. Calame
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/author/57215932210/daniel-g-calame
    snippet: Calame. Author information. Current affiliation: Baylor College of Medicine ... DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription ...