SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs neurogenesis, and alters histone H4K16 acetylation
    S Luo, S Qu, S Tan, Z Song, Y Lv, X Jia, J Tan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf
    snippet: … MSL2 variants carriers showed high prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (64.3%), while … were predominantly associated with feeding difficulties (81.3%) and hypotonia (76.5%). …

[3] Chromosome 3q22. 2‐q26. 2 Interstitial Deletion in a Patient With Wisconsin Syndrome, Blepharophimosis‐Ptosis‐Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome, Dandy‐Walker …
    P Prasun, S Henry… (2025)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.64138 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.64138
    snippet: … He developed feed intolerance shortly after starting nasogastric tube feeding. The upper gastrointestinal series with small bowel follow- through fluoroscopy revealed redundant second …
    abstract: Wisconsin syndrome is a very rare genetic condition characterized by coarse facies, prominent nasal tip, bushy high arched/upsweeping eyebrows, and a full/everted lower lip. Deletion of chromosome 3q24q25 region is considered critical for its manifestation. Deletion of the adjoining chromosome region 3q24 is associated with Dandy-Walker malformation, while 3q22.3 deletion is associated with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome. Here, we report an individual with chromosome 3q22.2-q26.2 interstitial deletion presenting with Wisconsin syndrome, blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome, Dandy-Walker malformation, Pierre Robin sequence, global developmental delays, and recurrent infections. This is the largest contiguous gene deletion reported in this region, and the combination of clinical features seen in this individual has not been reported before. Additionally, we propose that STAG1 is a candidate gene for recurrent infections in addition to cognitive impairment.

[4] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholars.duke.edu/individual/pub1633872
    snippet: ... hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. ... Karayol, R., Borroto, M. C. ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[5] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929724001642
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — ... hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. ... Karayol, J. Seyfferth, J.A. ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[6] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: In the newborn period she had hypotonia and difficulty feeding. She ... MSL2 gene in 25 unrelated patients with Karayol-Borroto ...

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://discovery.geisinger.org/esploro/outputs/journalArticle/MSL2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental/9915304209631
    snippet: ... MSL2. MSL2 ... hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding ... Remzi Karayol - Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics.
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/1875006
    snippet: Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome (KBHS) is characterized by developmental delay and impaired intellectual development. Hypotonia is an ...

[9] Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/karayol_borroto_haghshenas_neurodevelopmental_syndrome
    snippet: Symptoms associated with Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas Neurodevelopmental Syndrome ; Abdomen - Gastrointestinal · feeding difficulties ; Muscle Soft Tissue · hypotonia.

[10] MSL2 Variants Lead to a Neurodevelopmental Syndrome With ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://digitalcommons.library.tmc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5901&context=baylor_docs
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 12 — MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues ...