SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Non-Classic Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Due to BRD4 Gene Alterations: A Literature Review
    F Lonardo, M Falco, C Costabile, P Fontana (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9067/12/11/1440
    snippet: … as reduction defects affecting the upper limbs, such as monodactyly or oligodactyly. Individuals without severe limb malformations usually have small hands or feet. They may also …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare congenital disorder characterised by distinctive facial features, growth retardation, limb abnormalities and developmental delays. It is characterised by genetic heterogeneity and also presents a broad clinical variability, with a spectrum of manifestations ranging from mild to severe, with milder phenotypes that can be difficult to ascertain based on physical characteristics. Pathogenic variations in the <i>NIPBL</i> gene account for the majority of cases, but variations in several other genes, including <i>BRD4</i>, have been identified as causative factors for non-classic or milder forms of the syndrome. This review aims to analyse the roles that <i>BRD4</i> plays in the various pathways in which it is involved and to summarise current knowledge on atypical CdLS associated with <i>BRD4</i> gene alterations, highlighting clinical features, molecular mechanisms, and implications for diagnostic assessment and patient care.

[2] Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    MA Deardorff, SE Noon, ID Krantz (2020)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk1104/
    snippet: … upper-limb reduction defects that range from subtle phalangeal abnormalities to oligodactyly (… multigene panel that contains at least NIPBL, SMC1A, HDAC8, SMC3, RAD21 and BRD4 …
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[3] Cornelia de Lange syndrome: from a disease to a broader spectrum
    A Selicorni, M Mariani, A Lettieri, V Massa (2021)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/7/1075
    snippet: … , small hands and feet or limb malformations. The incidence of the … CdLS-associated variant in BRD4 delays the cell cycle by … of variable severity (from oligodactyly to ulnar deficiency to …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetic disease that exemplifies the evolution of knowledge in the field of rare genetic disorders. Originally described as a unique pattern of major and minor anomalies, over time this syndrome has been shown to be characterized by a significant variability of clinical expression. By increasing the number of patients described, knowledge of the natural history of the condition has been enriched with the demonstration of the relative frequency of various potential comorbidities. Since 2006, the discovery of CdLS's molecular basis has shown an equally vast genetic heterogeneity linked to the presence of variants in genes encoding for the cohesin complex pathway. The most recent clinical-genetic data led to the classification of the "original syndrome" into a "clinical spectrum" that foresees the presence of classic patients, of non-classic forms, and of conditions that show a modest phenotypic overlapping with the original disease. Finally, the knowledge of the molecular basis of the disease has allowed the development of basic research projects that could lay the foundations for the development of possible innovative pharmacological treatments.

[4] Confirmation of BRD4 haploinsufficiency role in Cornelia de Lange–like phenotype and delineation of a 19p13.12p13.11 gene contiguous syndrome
    V Alesi, ML Dentici, S Loddo… (2019)
    DOI:10.1111/ahg.12289 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ahg.12289
    snippet: … Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetically and clinical heterogeneous condition … upper limb reduction defects, which vary from subtle phalangeal abnormalities to oligodactyly …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetically and clinical heterogeneous condition characterized by congenital malformation, intellectual disability, and peculiar dysmorphic features. Recently, BRD4 (19p13.12) was proposed as a new critical gene associated with a mild CdLS because of a similar presentation of the patients carrying point mutations and of its involvement in the NIPBL pathway. Patients harboring a 19p interstitial deletion shared some physical features with BRD4 mutation carriers, which results in a more complex phenotype because of the involvement of several neighboring genes. We report a new 19p deletion in a patient clinically diagnosed as CdLS, partially overlapping with previously published cases with the aim to support the role of BRD4 haploinsufficiency in a CdL-like phenotype and to improve the delineation of 19p13.12p13.11 deletion as a new nonrecurrent gene contiguous syndrome, spanning GIPC1, NOTCH3, BRD4, AKAP8, AKAP8L, CASP14, and EPS15L1 genes. Previously described cases are reviewed, attempting to delineate a genotype-phenotype correlation.

[5] Genomic analyses in Cornelia de Lange Syndrome and related diagnoses: Novel candidate genes, genotype–phenotype correlations and common mechanisms
    M Kaur, J Blair, B Devkota, S Fortunato… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63247 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63247
    snippet: … (b) Variable upper limb differences seen in CdLS ranging from severe oligodactyly on the left to … BRD4 and ANKRD11 have only recently been added to the list of known CdLS-causing …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare, dominantly inherited multisystem developmental disorder characterized by highly variable manifestations of growth and developmental delays, upper limb involvement, hypertrichosis, cardiac, gastrointestinal, craniofacial, and other systemic features. Pathogenic variants in genes encoding cohesin complex structural subunits and regulatory proteins (NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, HDAC8, and RAD21) are the major pathogenic contributors to CdLS. Heterozygous or hemizygous variants in the genes encoding these five proteins have been found to be contributory to CdLS, with variants in NIPBL accounting for the majority (>60%) of cases, and the only gene identified to date that results in the severe or classic form of CdLS when mutated. Pathogenic variants in cohesin genes other than NIPBL tend to result in a less severe phenotype. Causative variants in additional genes, such as ANKRD11, EP300, AFF4, TAF1, and BRD4, can cause a CdLS-like phenotype. The common role that these genes, and others, play as critical regulators of developmental transcriptional control has led to the conditions they cause being referred to as disorders of transcriptional regulation (or "DTRs"). Here, we report the results of a comprehensive molecular analysis in a cohort of 716 probands with typical and atypical CdLS in order to delineate the genetic contribution of causative variants in cohesin complex genes as well as novel candidate genes, genotype-phenotype correlations, and the utility of genome sequencing in understanding the mutational landscape in this population.

[6] Non-Classic Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Due to BRD4 ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12650802 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12650802/
    snippet: by F Lonardo · 2025 · Cited by 2 — Non-Classic Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Due to BRD4 ... Characterization of Limb Differences in Children with Cornelia de Lange Syndrome.
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare congenital disorder characterised by distinctive facial features, growth retardation, limb abnormalities and developmental delays. It is characterised by genetic heterogeneity and also presents a broad clinical variability, with a spectrum of manifestations ranging from mild to severe, with milder phenotypes that can be difficult to ascertain based on physical characteristics. Pathogenic variations in the <i>NIPBL</i> gene account for the majority of cases, but variations in several other genes, including <i>BRD4</i>, have been identified as causative factors for non-classic or milder forms of the syndrome. This review aims to analyse the roles that <i>BRD4</i> plays in the various pathways in which it is involved and to summarise current knowledge on atypical CdLS associated with <i>BRD4</i> gene alterations, highlighting clinical features, molecular mechanisms, and implications for diagnostic assessment and patient care.

[7] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome (CDL)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/cornelia_de_lange_syndrome
    snippet: ... limb abnormalities, oligodactyly, to brachymetacarpia of the first metacarpus). ... BRD4 · NIPBL. 10, Embryonic lethality, complete penetrance, MP:0011092, 3/571 ...

[8] BRD4 binds to active cranial neural crest enhancers ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://journals.biologists.com/dev/article/151/2/dev202110/342399/BRD4-binds-to-active-cranial-neural-crest
    snippet: Upper limb defects such as oligodactyly and forearm deficiencies are ... Model of BRD4 function in Cornelia de Lange syndrome craniofacial pathogenesis.
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a congenital disorder featuring facial dysmorphism, postnatal growth deficits, cognitive disability and upper limb abnormalities. CdLS is genetically heterogeneous, with cases arising from mutation of BRD4, a bromodomain protein that binds and reads acetylated histones. In this study, we have modeled CdLS facial pathology through mouse neural crest cell (NCC)-specific mutation of BRD4 to characterize cellular and molecular function in craniofacial development. Mice with BRD4 NCC loss of function died at birth with severe facial hypoplasia, cleft palate, mid-facial clefting and exencephaly. Following migration, BRD4 mutant NCCs initiated RUNX2 expression for differentiation to osteoblast lineages but failed to induce downstream RUNX2 targets required for lineage commitment. BRD4 bound to active enhancers to regulate expression of osteogenic transcription factors and extracellular matrix components integral for bone formation. RUNX2 physically interacts with a C-terminal domain in the long isoform of BRD4 and can co-occupy osteogenic enhancers. This BRD4 association is required for RUNX2 recruitment and appropriate osteoblast differentiation. We conclude that BRD4 controls facial bone development through osteoblast enhancer regulation of the RUNX2 transcriptional program.

[9] De Lange Syndrome - an overview
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:20301283 https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/de-lange-syndrome
    snippet: Cornelia de Lange syndrome is characterised by facial and limb malformations, prenatal and postnatal growth restriction, and developmental delay. The incidence ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[10] Advancing the Clinical and Molecular Understanding of ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: by K Gruca-Stryjak · 2024 · Cited by 6 — Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a complex genetic disorder with distinct facial features, growth limitations, and limb anomalies.
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a complex genetic disorder with distinct facial features, growth limitations, and limb anomalies. Its broad clinical spectrum presents significant challenges in pediatric diagnosis and management. Due to cohesin complex mutations, the disorder's variable presentation requires extensive research to refine care and improve outcomes. This article provides a case series review of pediatric CdLS patients alongside a comprehensive literature review, exploring clinical variability and the relationship between genotypic changes and phenotypic outcomes. It also discusses the evolution of diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, emphasizing innovations in genetic testing, including detecting mosaicism and novel genetic variations. The aim is to synthesize case studies with current research to advance our understanding of CdLS and the effectiveness of management strategies in pediatric healthcare. This work highlights the need for an integrated, evidence-based approach to diagnosis and treatment. It aims to fill existing research gaps and advocate for holistic care protocols and tailored treatment plans for CdLS patients, ultimately improving their quality of life.