SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Patent application title: STEM CELL MICROPARTICLES Inventors: John Sinden (Guildford, GB) Lara Stevanato (Guildford, GB) Randolph Corteling (Guildford …
    IPC Class, A USPC (2015)
    https://www.patentsencyclopedia.com/app/20150079046
    snippet: stem cell microparticles, their use and production, in particular neural stem cell microparticles and their use in therapy. The stem cell microparticle is typically an exosome or …

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … As for DDX3X and DHX30, expansion of the DHX9 allelic series and functional studies will facilitate genotypephenotype correlations and provide greater insights into the contribution of …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] Paralog studies augment gene discovery: DDX and DHX genes
    I Paine, JE Posey, CM Grochowski… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30226-5
    snippet: … Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in …
    abstract: Members of a paralogous gene family in which variation in one gene is known to cause disease are eight times more likely to also be associated with human disease. Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in paralogous genes encoding members of the DExD/H-box RNA helicase superfamily might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease phenotypes. Here we describe 15 unrelated individuals who have DD and/or ID, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H-box RNA helicase genes. In addition, these individuals exhibit a variety of other tissue and organ system involvement including ocular, outer ear, hearing, cardiac, and kidney tissues. Five individuals with homozygous (one), compound-heterozygous (two), or de novo (two) missense variants in DHX37 were identified by exome sequencing. We identified ten total individuals with missense variants in three other DDX/DHX paralogs: DHX16 (four individuals), DDX54 (three individuals), and DHX34 (three individuals). Most identified variants are rare, predicted to be damaging, and occur at conserved amino acid residues. Taken together, these 15 individuals implicate the DExD/H-box helicases in both dominantly and recessively inherited neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlight the potential for more than one disease mechanism underlying these disorders.

[4] Cellular functions of eukaryotic RNA helicases and their links to human diseases
    KE Bohnsack, S Yi, S Venus, E Jankowsky… (2023)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41580-023-00628-5
    snippet: … do not require the enzymatic activity of DHX9. However, … Mutations in DDX6 are associated with neurodegenerative … DHX30 probably performs additional functions in mitochondrial RNA …
    abstract: RNA helicases are highly conserved proteins that use nucleoside triphosphates to bind or remodel RNA, RNA-protein complexes or both. RNA helicases are classified into the DEAD-box, DEAH/RHA, Ski2-like, Upf1-like and RIG-I families, and are the largest class of enzymes active in eukaryotic RNA metabolism - virtually all aspects of gene expression and its regulation involve RNA helicases. Mutation and dysregulation of these enzymes have been linked to a multitude of diseases, including cancer and neurological disorders. In this Review, we discuss the regulation and functional mechanisms of RNA helicases and their roles in eukaryotic RNA metabolism, including in transcription regulation, pre-mRNA splicing, ribosome assembly, translation and RNA decay. We highlight intriguing models that link helicase structure, mechanisms of function (such as local strand unwinding, translocation, winching, RNA clamping and displacing RNA-binding proteins) and biological roles, including emerging connections between RNA helicases and cellular condensates formed through liquid-liquid phase separation. We also discuss associations of RNA helicases with human diseases and recent efforts towards the design of small-molecule inhibitors of these pivotal regulators of eukaryotic gene expression.

[5] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 variants is also beginning to emerge [27,28]. Clinical data for individuals carrying variants in DDX6 [25], EIF4A2 [24], or …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — Molecular, clinical, and quantitative phenotypic analyses characterized two DHX9-associated disease traits: DD/ID and axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease - Genetics
    (authors not shown)
    https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/charcot-marie-tooth-disease/
    snippet: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is a group of disorders characterized by motor and sensory neuropathy. This condition mainly affects peripheral ...

[8] Genetic Testing for Diagnosis of Inherited Peripheral ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.bcbsnc.com/providers/policies-guidelines-codes/commercial/laboratory/notifications/genetic-testing-for-diagnosis-of-inherited-peripheral-neuropathies-01-01-19
    snippet: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is one of the most common inherited neurological disorders, affecting approximately 1 in 2,500 people in the United States.

[9] DHX9 - New Candidate Gene for Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.infrafrontier.eu/news/dhx9-new-candidate-gene-for-neurodevelopmental-disorders-and-charcot-marie-tooth-disease/
    snippet: DHX9 variant alleles were identified with phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease ...
    abstract: Recurrent high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) and endometrial cancer remain major clinical challenges with limited effective treatment options. DExH-box helicase 9 (DHX9), a DNA/RNA helicase essential for genomic stability, has not yet been explored as a therapeutic target in gynecologic cancers. In this study, we show that a selective DHX9 inhibitor (DHX9i) suppresses proliferation in a subset of HGSOC and endometrial cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, chromosomal instability, and mitotic failure. This effect was independent of microsatellite instability status and prior resistance to platinum or PARP inhibitors. Genomic analysis indicated that DHX9i resistance was unlikely to be driven by single-gene mutations but was instead associated with copy-number alterations in mitotic spindle and microtubule-regulating genes in both HGSOC and endometrial cancer. Transcriptomic profiling further revealed consistent alterations in microtubule- and spindle-associated pathways in DHX9i-resistant models following DHX9i treatment. Mechanistically, DHX9i induced mitotic defects in DHX9i-sensitive models, whereas resistant lines maintained mitotic integrity. Given the convergence of resistance-associated features on microtubule-related pathways, we combined DHX9i with the microtubule-stabilizing agent paclitaxel to enhance mitotic stress. This combination triggered mitotic disruption and enhanced cytotoxicity in DHX9i-resistant cells. In vivo, the combination led to sustained tumor regression and prolonged survival in both DHX9i-sensitive and DHX9i-resistant models without notable toxicity. Overall, our findings define genomic, transcriptomic, and phenotypic characteristics associated with differential responses to DHX9i and support the clinical evaluation of the DHX9i-paclitaxel combination as a therapeutic strategy in recurrent gynecologic cancers.

[10] Clinical and genetic aspects of Charcot-Marie-Tooth ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.pfmjournal.org/m/journal/view.php?number=51
    snippet: by SH Nam · 2019 · Cited by 46 — Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common form of inherited peripheral neuropathy, with a prevalence of one in 2,500 people [1]. CMT ...