SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … The yellow arrow indicates a thin corpus callosum. Red arrows indicate cerebellar atrophy. Yellow arrowheads show enlargement of the ventricles, and yellow asterisks (brain MRI, sec…
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[2] The evolving spectrum of complex inherited neuropathies
    AM Rossor, S Haddad… (2024)
    PMC11377048 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11377048/
    snippet: … In addition to a histopathological signature, brain MRI in NIID commonly reveals leu… Failure to thrive, facial dimorphism, agenesis of the corpus callosum, death in first year of life…
    abstract: <h4>Purpose of review</h4>Inherited peripheral neuropathies can be divided into those diseases in which peripheral neuropathy is the sole or main feature of the disease (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease) and those in which peripheral neuropathy is just one feature of a more complex syndrome. In recent years there has been a substantial expansion in the number of genes associated with complex neuropathy syndromes.<h4>Recent findings</h4>This review will focus on emerging themes in this group of diseases, namely the increasing number of diseases due to repeat expansions; the emergence of both recessive and dominant negative alleles in the same gene producing a common phenotype and diseases in which there is selective loss of the allele from haematopoietic stem cells making genetic diagnosis on blood derived DNA problematic.<h4>Summary</h4>In this review we provide a practical approach to investigating and diagnosing patients with peripheral neuropathy as part of a complex syndrome and provide an updated table of the genes associated with this group of diseases.

[3] Paralog studies augment gene discovery: DDX and DHX genes
    I Paine, JE Posey, CM Grochowski… (2019)
    PMID:31256877 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.06.001 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30226-5
    snippet: … and who presented with agenesis of the corpus callosum, seizures, and chorioretinal … corpus callosum, the proband also has other abnormalities present on the most recent brain MRI …
    abstract: Members of a paralogous gene family in which variation in one gene is known to cause disease are eight times more likely to also be associated with human disease. Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in paralogous genes encoding members of the DExD/H-box RNA helicase superfamily might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease phenotypes. Here we describe 15 unrelated individuals who have DD and/or ID, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H-box RNA helicase genes. In addition, these individuals exhibit a variety of other tissue and organ system involvement including ocular, outer ear, hearing, cardiac, and kidney tissues. Five individuals with homozygous (one), compound-heterozygous (two), or de novo (two) missense variants in DHX37 were identified by exome sequencing. We identified ten total individuals with missense variants in three other DDX/DHX paralogs: DHX16 (four individuals), DDX54 (three individuals), and DHX34 (three individuals). Most identified variants are rare, predicted to be damaging, and occur at conserved amino acid residues. Taken together, these 15 individuals implicate the DExD/H-box helicases in both dominantly and recessively inherited neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlight the potential for more than one disease mechanism underlying these disorders.

[4] Hereditary Motor Sensory Neuropathies (HMSN)/Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (CMT)
    SV Khadilkar, RS Yadav, BA Patel (2024)
    DOI:10.1007/978-981-97-9010-4_44 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-97-9010-4_44
    snippet: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most commonly encountered group of hereditary neuropathies that manifest with slowly progressive muscle weakness and sensory loss. …

[5] Axonal motor polyneuropathy in a 13 years old Girl with a de Novo variant in ADNP
    S Scaccini, CA Cesaroni, SG Caraffi, S Rizzi, S Rosato… (2025)
    PMID:39992398 DOI:10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w
    snippet: … Brain MRI, performed at two years of age, showed global reduction of the supratentorial white matter, volumetric reduction of the middle third of the corpus callosum, slight … 1 Brain MRI (…
    abstract: ADNP-Related Disorder [previously known as Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome (HVDAS)] is a rare genetic condition resulting from mutations in the activity-dependent neuroprotector homeobox (ADNP) gene. The ADNP protein has multiple functions, including serving as an essential transcription factor for brain development. In addition, pathogenic variants in ADNP have been recognized as one of the most frequent monogenic causes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability. Clinical features include craniofacial dysmorphisms, congenital heart defects, gastrointestinal problems such as feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux and frequent vomiting, vision problems, recurrent infections and seizures. Here we describe the novel case of a girl who came to our attention in infancy because of poor and stereotyped motor repertoire, repetitive purposeless movements, and intellectual disability. Whole exome sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous variant in the ADNP gene, leading to the diagnosis of HVDAS at age 5 years. At the age of 12, nerve conduction velocity testing showed severe four-limb axonal motor polyneuropathy. In this article, we would like to focus on the presence of peripheral nervous system involvement associated with the pathogenic ADNP de novo variant, which may contribute to the clinical characterization of ADNP-Related Disorder.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — ... brain MRI ... Imaging findings included white-matter volume loss with enlargement of the ventricles, thinning of the corpus callosum, and cerebral ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] Exome Sequencing Reveals Novel Variants and Expands ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34946966 DOI:10.3390/genes12122014 https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/12/2014
    snippet: by M Dawidziuk · 2021 · Cited by 22 — DHX9: In patient T91 with SM (−2.8 SD), corpus callosum dysgenesis, DD ... brain MRI studies. Three patients were found with strabismus, which ...
    abstract: Congenital microcephaly causes smaller than average head circumference relative to age, sex and ethnicity and is most usually associated with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders. The underlying etiology is highly heterogeneous and can be either environmental or genetic. Disruption of any one of multiple biological processes, such as those underlying neurogenesis, cell cycle and division, DNA repair or transcription regulation, can result in microcephaly. This etiological heterogeneity manifests in a clinical variability and presents a major diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, leaving an unacceptably large proportion of over half of microcephaly patients without molecular diagnosis. To elucidate the clinical and genetic landscapes of congenital microcephaly, we sequenced the exomes of 191 clinically diagnosed patients with microcephaly as one of the features. We established a molecular basis for microcephaly in 71 patients (37%), and detected novel variants in five high confidence candidate genes previously unassociated with this condition. We report a large number of patients with mutations in tubulin-related genes in our cohort as well as higher incidence of pathogenic mutations in <i>MCPH</i> genes. Our study expands the phenotypic and genetic landscape of microcephaly, facilitating differential clinical diagnoses for disorders associated with most commonly disrupted genes in our cohort.

[8] Activity
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/activity/?panel=285&entity=CIT
    snippet: Sarah Leigh reviewed gene: DHX9: Rating: GREEN; Mode of pathogenicity ... Brain MRI revealed corpus callosum anomalies (2/2) and cerebral atrophy (2/2) ...

[9] DDX3X syndrome: From clinical phenotypes to biological ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38976626 DOI:10.1111/jnc.16174 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jnc.16174
    snippet: by A von Mueffling · 2024 · Cited by 18 — ... brain MRI scan (Lennox et al., 2020; Parra et al., 2024). In the largest retrospective study, 87% presented with corpus callosum ... DHX9 ...
    abstract: DDX3X syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder accounting for up to 3% of cases of intellectual disability (ID) and affecting primarily females. Individuals diagnosed with DDX3X syndrome can also present with behavioral challenges, motor delays and movement disorders, epilepsy, and congenital malformations. DDX3X syndrome is caused by mutations in the X-linked gene DDX3X, which encodes a DEAD-box RNA helicase with critical roles in RNA metabolism, including mRNA translation. Emerging discoveries from animal models are unveiling a fundamental role of DDX3X in neuronal differentiation and development, especially in the neocortex. Here, we review the current knowledge of genetic and neurobiological mechanisms underlying DDX3X syndrome and their relationship with clinical phenotypes.

[10] Radiogenomics of congenital brain malformations: Linking embryology, genetics, and imaging
    J AlRayahi, K AlDasuqi, M AlSubhi, W Mubarak… (2026)
    PMID:41670708 DOI:10.1007/s00234-026-03916-x https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00234-026-03916-x
    snippet: … include corpus callosum dysgenesis, ventriculomegaly, interhemispheric cyst and cerebellar dysplasia. These patients present with hearing loss, seizures and intellectual disability [77, …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Congenital brain malformations are structural anomalies present at birth stemming from underlying genetic mutations or prenatal disruptions. The increased use of advanced genomic sequencing has led to major breakthroughs in pediatric neurogenetics; however, progress in unraveling the genetic basis of many central nervous system (CNS) malformations has lagged. This gap is partly due to the complexity of brain development and challenges like establishing the genetic culprit in somatic mosaicism. This review aims to integrate embryology, genetics, and neuroimaging to provide a practical radiogenomic framework for congenital brain malformations.<h4>Methods</h4>A narrative review of the literature was performed focusing on fundamental embryologic processes of CNS development, genetic concepts relevant to malformations, and key molecular pathways and protein structures implicated in neurodevelopment. Representative malformations of cortical development, midline anomalies, and hindbrain malformations are discussed with emphasis on radiologic-genetic correlations.<h4>Results</h4>Critical developmental pathways and proteins-including mTOR and Ras/MAPK signaling cascades and the tubulin cytoskeleton-are central to the pathogenesis of congenital brain malformations. Genetic principles, such as types of genetic alterations (e.g. somatic vs germline), mosaicism, penetrance, and expressivity explain the imaging and clinical phenotype variability and the diagnostic challenges encountered. Distinct radiogenomic patterns are identified across malformations of cortical development, corpus callosum anomalies, holoprosencephaly and posterior fossa malformations highlighting the diagnostic value of integrating neuroimaging with embryologic and molecular insights.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Radiogenomic correlation of congenital brain malformations is increasingly important in the era of precision medicine. By correlating neuroimaging phenotypes with the relevant embryologic and molecular mechanism, neuroradiologists can improve diagnostic accuracy, guide genetic testing strategies, and contribute to multidisciplinary care and counseling.