SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Diagnosis of TBC1D32‐associated conditions: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of a complex ciliopathy
    SC Harris, K Chong, D Chitayat… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63150 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63150
    snippet: … segregate with recessive disease in TBC1D32, including four … TBC1D32 is involved in the development and function of cilia … to expand the phenotype correlated with TBC1D32 variants, …
    abstract: Exome sequencing is a powerful tool in prenatal and postnatal genetics and can help identify novel candidate genes critical to human development. We describe seven unpublished probands with rare likely pathogenic variants or variants of uncertain significance that segregate with recessive disease in TBC1D32, including four fetal probands in three unrelated pedigrees and three pediatric probands in unrelated pedigrees. We also report clinical comparisons with seven previously published patients. Index probands were identified through an ongoing prenatal exome sequencing study and through an online data sharing platform (Gene Matcher™). A literature review was also completed. TBC1D32 is involved in the development and function of cilia and is expressed in the developing hypothalamus and pituitary gland. We provide additional data to expand the phenotype correlated with TBC1D32 variants, including a severe prenatal phenotype associated with life-limiting congenital anomalies.

[2] Joubert syndrome
    M Parisi, I Glass (2017)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk1325/
    snippet: … The phenotype most closely resembles pure or classic Joubert … the molar tooth sign and the clinical features of classic Joubert syndrome and also have other organ system involvement. …

[3] Alsahan-Harris Syndrome (ALHAS)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/alsahan_harris_syndrome
    snippet: Alsahan-Harris syndrome (ALHAS) is an autosomal recessive syndrome with a severe prenatal phenotype and life-limiting congenital anomalies.

[4] Clinical and molecular features of Joubert syndrome ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:19876931 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.c.30229 PMC2797758 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2797758/
    snippet: by MA Parisi · 2009 · Cited by 354 — Many children with Joubert syndrome exhibit dysmorphic facial features that include broad forehead, arched eyebrows, eyelid ptosis, wide-spaced eyes, open mouth ...
    abstract: Joubert syndrome (JBTS; OMIM 213300) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a specific congenital malformation of the hindbrain and a broad spectrum of other phenotypic findings that is now known to be caused by defects in the structure and/or function of the primary cilium. The complex hindbrain malformation that is characteristic of JBTS can be identified on axial magnetic resonance imaging and is known as the molar tooth sign (MTS); other diagnostic criteria include intellectual disability, hypotonia, and often, abnormal respiratory pattern and/or abnormal eye movements. In addition, a broad spectrum of other anomalies characterize Joubert syndrome and related disorders (JSRD), and may include retinal dystrophy, ocular coloboma, oral frenulae and tongue tumors, polydactyly, cystic renal disease (including cystic dysplasia or juvenile nephronophthisis), and congenital hepatic fibrosis. The clinical course can be variable, but most children with this condition survive infancy to reach adulthood. At least eight genes cause JSRD, with some genotype-phenotype correlations emerging, including the association between mutations in the MKS3 gene and hepatic fibrosis characteristic of the JSRD subtype known as COACH syndrome. Several of the causative genes for JSRD are implicated in other ciliary disorders, such as juvenile nephronophthisis and Meckel syndrome, illustrating the close association between these conditions and their overlapping clinical features that reflect a shared etiology involving the primary cilium.

[5] TBC1D32 gene TBC1 Domain Family Member 32
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/TBC1D32
    snippet: Autosomal recessive syndrome with variable oral, facial, digital, pituitary, and eye defects. Bone diseases, Ear diseases, Endocrine diseases, Eye diseases, ...

[6] Conditions Associated With TBC1D32
    (authors not shown)
    https://franklin.genoox.com/clinical-db/variant/snp/chr6-121401967-G-A?app=conditions
    snippet: Conditions Associated With TBC1D32 · orofaciodigital syndrome · RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 100 · ALSAHAN-HARRIS SYNDROME · ciliopathy · TBC1D32-related ciliopathy.

[7] Genotype–phenotype correlates in Joubert syndrome: A review
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:35238134 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.c.31963 PMC9314610 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9314610/
    snippet: by S Gana · 2022 · Cited by 138 — some facial dysmorphisms are often observed, such as prominent forehead, arched eyebrows, ptosis, trapezoid‐shaped mouth with lower lip ...
    abstract: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a genetically heterogeneous primary ciliopathy characterized by a pathognomonic cerebellar and brainstem malformation, the "molar tooth sign," and variable organ involvement. Over 40 causative genes have been identified to date, explaining up to 94% of cases. To date, gene-phenotype correlates have been delineated only for a handful of genes, directly translating into improved counseling and clinical care. For instance, JS individuals harboring pathogenic variants in TMEM67 have a significantly higher risk of liver fibrosis, while pathogenic variants in NPHP1, RPGRIP1L, and TMEM237 are frequently associated to JS with renal involvement, requiring a closer monitoring of liver parameters, or renal functioning. On the other hand, individuals with causal variants in the CEP290 or AHI1 need a closer surveillance for retinal dystrophy and, in case of CEP290, also for chronic kidney disease. These examples highlight how an accurate description of the range of clinical symptoms associated with defects in each causative gene, including the rare ones, would better address prognosis and help guiding a personalized management. This review proposes to address this issue by assessing the available literature, to confirm known, as well as to propose rare gene-phenotype correlates in JS.