SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] 620423 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620423
    snippet: AR, 3, 617717 · FDXR · 103270 · 17q25.1 · Multiple mitochondrial ... Plasma glycine, CSF glycine, and a plasma/CSF glycine ratio were elevated at 1 year of age.

[2] Cerebrospinal fluid amino acids glycine, serine, and threonine in nonketotic hyperglycinemia
    MA Swanson, K Miller, SP Young… (2022)
    PMID:35357708 DOI:10.1002/jimd.12500 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jimd.12500
    snippet: … In nonketotic hyperglycinemia there is deficient activity of the … This can be used to discriminate classic NKH from transient NKH, where CSF glycine and CSF/plasma glycine ratio are …
    abstract: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is caused by deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity and characterized by elevated brain glycine. Metabolism of glycine is connected enzymatically to serine through serine hydroxymethyltransferase and shares transporters with serine and threonine. We aimed to evaluate changes in serine and threonine in NKH patients, and relate this to clinical outcome severity. Age-related reference values were developed for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) serine and threonine from 274 controls, and in a cross-sectional study compared to 61 genetically proven NKH patients, categorized according to outcome. CSF d-serine and l-serine levels were stereoselectively determined in seven NKH patients and compared to 29 age-matched controls. In addition to elevated CSF glycine, NKH patients had significantly decreased levels of CSF serine and increased levels of CSF threonine, even after age-adjustment. The CSF serine/threonine ratio discriminated between NKH patients and controls. The CSF glycine/serine aided in discrimination between severe and attenuated neonates with NKH. Over all ages, the CSF glycine, serine and threonine had moderate to fair correlation with outcome classes. After age-adjustment, only the CSF glycine level provided good discrimination between outcome classes. In untreated patients, d-serine was more reduced than l-serine, with a decreased d/l-serine ratio, indicating a specific impact on d-serine metabolism. We conclude that in NKH the elevation of glycine is accompanied by changes in l-serine, d-serine and threonine, likely reflecting a perturbation of the serine shuttle and metabolism, and of one-carbon metabolism. This provides additional guidance on diagnosis and prognosis, and opens new therapeutic avenues to be explored.

[3] Molecular basis of rare diseases associated to the maturation of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S]-containing proteins
    F Camponeschi, S Ciofi (2022)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2218-273X/12/7/1009
    snippet: … , leukodystrophy, lactic acidosis, nonketotic hyperglycinemia and death in early childhood [5,… increased glycine levels in CSF and serum, and a combined respiratory chain deficiency of …
    abstract: The importance of mitochondria in mammalian cells is widely known. Several biochemical reactions and pathways take place within mitochondria: among them, there are those involving the biogenesis of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters. The latter are evolutionarily conserved, ubiquitous inorganic cofactors, performing a variety of functions, such as electron transport, enzymatic catalysis, DNA maintenance, and gene expression regulation. The synthesis and distribution of Fe-S clusters are strictly controlled cellular processes that involve several mitochondrial proteins that specifically interact each other to form a complex machinery (Iron Sulfur Cluster assembly machinery, ISC machinery hereafter). This machinery ensures the correct assembly of both [2Fe-2S] and [4Fe-4S] clusters and their insertion in the mitochondrial target proteins. The present review provides a structural and molecular overview of the rare diseases associated with the genes encoding for the accessory proteins of the ISC machinery (i.e., GLRX5, ISCA1, ISCA2, IBA57, FDX2, BOLA3, IND1 and NFU1) involved in the assembly and insertion of [4Fe-4S] clusters in mitochondrial proteins. The disease-related missense mutations were mapped on the 3D structures of these accessory proteins or of their protein complexes, and the possible impact that these mutations have on their specific activity/function in the frame of the mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] protein biogenesis is described.

[4] Mitochondrial diseases: expanding the diagnosis in the era of genetic testing
    RP Saneto (2020)
    PMC7791531 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7791531/
    snippet: … Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is an autosomal disorder characterized by variants in the glycine … Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) donates electrons from NADPH to homologous …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases are clinically and genetically heterogeneous. These diseases were initially described a little over three decades ago. Limited diagnostic tools created disease descriptions based on clinical, biochemical analytes, neuroimaging, and muscle biopsy findings. This diagnostic mechanism continued to evolve detection of inherited oxidative phosphorylation disorders and expanded discovery of mitochondrial physiology over the next two decades. Limited genetic testing hampered the definitive diagnostic identification and breadth of diseases. Over the last decade, the development and incorporation of massive parallel sequencing has identified approximately 300 genes involved in mitochondrial disease. Gene testing has enlarged our understanding of how genetic defects lead to cellular dysfunction and disease. These findings have expanded the understanding of how mechanisms of mitochondrial physiology can induce dysfunction and disease, but the complete collection of disease-causing gene variants remains incomplete. This article reviews the developments in disease gene discovery and the incorporation of gene findings with mitochondrial physiology. This understanding is critical to the development of targeted therapies.

[5] Pitfalls in the diagnosis of glycine encephalopathy (non-ketotic hyperglycinemia)
    SH Korman, A Gutman (2002)
    PMID:12418798 DOI:10.1017/s0012162201002808 https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/developmental-medicine-and-child-neurology/article/pitfalls-in-the-diagnosis-of-glycine-encephalopathy-nonketotic-hyperglycinemia/D0A18B1EDE25A590489086B5F105CF14
    snippet: … glycine concentration in the plasma and to an even greater extent in the CSF, leading to an elevation of the CSF:plasma glycine ratio (… The fundamental defect is in the glycine cleavage …

[6] A Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia Mouse Shows Wide‐Ranging Biochemical Consequences of Elevated Glycine, Reduced Folate One‐Carbon Charging, and Serine …
    MA Swanson, H Jiang, LD Kolora… (2026)
    PMID:41603187 DOI:10.1002/jimd.70137 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jimd.70137
    snippet: … in brain and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [14, 15]. Excess … an increase in the spontaneous rate of electrographic spikes on … (Table 1), in plasma glycine concentration was doubled, and …
    abstract: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia is a severe neonatal epileptic encephalopathy caused by deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity, for which currently no effective treatment exists. Incomplete understanding of brain biochemistry represents a major knowledge gap to develop new treatments. We examined the biochemistry in blood, liver, cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum of a mouse model homozygous for the Gldc variant p.Ala394Val. Glycine was increased in all compartments and caused increased brain neurotoxic metabolites guanidinoacetate and methylglyoxal, and also N-acetylglycine and cystathionine. The glycine extruding transporter Slc6a20 was increased. There was reduced one-carbon folate charging with secondarily reduced methionine in the cortex, and reduced alternative one-carbon donors L-serine and formate. Serine deficiency was associated with reduced amounts of sphingosine, sphingomyelin, and ceramide species important for myelination, but not phosphatidylserines. There was a region-specific deficiency of D-serine in the cortex and hippocampus. This difference, also present in humans, was strain- and age-related, most evident in young J129X1/SvJ mice, reflecting symptomatology. There was no evidence of oxidative stress or a bioenergetic defect. The biochemistry of the nonketotic hyperglycinemia mouse model can be traced to three components: increased glycine, reduced folate one-carbon charging, and decreased L- and D-serine. These changes will need to be addressed in new therapeutic approaches.

[7] Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia - GeneReviews® - NCBI Bookshelf
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1357/
    snippet: by JLK Van Hove · 2019 · Cited by 92 — CSF glycine elevated >230 μmol/L predicts severe outcome; a CSF:plasma glycine ratio of <0.08 predicts attenuated outcome [Swanson et al 2015].
    abstract: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a rare genetic disease caused by an inborn error in glycine metabolism. Due to a mutation in the glycine cleavage enzyme system, patients cannot break down glycine, ultimately leading to glycine accumulation throughout the body. The buildup of glycine primarily occurs in the spinal cord and brain; thus, this condition's initial clinical manifestations and long-term sequelae are more often neurological in origin. No known interventions are effective in altering the natural history of nonketotic hyperglycinemia, but available therapeutic strategies may reduce the comorbidities associated with this condition. Clinicians should recognize this disease and initiate early evaluation and treatment to achieve the best possible outcome.

[8] Sequential magnetic resonance spectroscopic changes in ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:22977444 DOI:10.3345/kjp.2012.55.8.301 https://www.e-cep.org/m/journal/view.php?number=2012600030
    snippet: by JH Shin · Cited by 8 — The elevated ratio of CSF to plasma glycine distinguishes NKH from other glycine metabolism disorders. However, as there is a relatively ...
    abstract: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a rare inborn error of amino acid metabolism. A defect in the glycine cleavage enzyme system results in highly elevated concentrations of glycine in the plasma, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain, resulting in glycine-induced encephalopathy and neuropathy. The prevalence of NKH in Korea is very low, and no reports of surviving patients are available, given the scarcity and poor prognosis of this disease. In the current study, we present a patient with NKH diagnosed on the basis of clinical features, biochemical profiles, and genetic analysis. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) allowed the measurement of absolute glycine concentrations in different parts of the brain that showed a significantly increased glycine peak, consolidating the diagnosis of NKH. In additional, serial MRS follow-up showed changes in the glycine/creatinine ratios in different parts of the brain. In conclusion, MRS is an effective, noninvasive diagnostic tool for NKH that can be used to distinguish this disease from other glycine metabolism disorders. It may also be useful for monitoring NKH treatment.

[9] Clinical Evaluation and Outcome of Patients with Severe ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://jag.journalagent.com/z4/download_fulltext.asp?pdir=vmj&plng=eng&un=VMJ-96977
    snippet: Non-ketotic hyperglycinemia is a life-threatening inborn error of amino acid metabolism. Although CSF and plasma glycine levels are reduced with medication, ...

[10] Nonketotic hyperglycinemia
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:32310600 https://www.medlink.com/articles/nonketotic-hyperglycinemia
    snippet: CSF glycine levels were moderately elevated as was the CSF/plasma glycine ratio, suggesting a diagnosis of nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
    abstract: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a rare genetic disease caused by an inborn error in glycine metabolism. Due to a mutation in the glycine cleavage enzyme system, patients cannot break down glycine, ultimately leading to glycine accumulation throughout the body. The buildup of glycine primarily occurs in the spinal cord and brain; thus, this condition's initial clinical manifestations and long-term sequelae are more often neurological in origin. No known interventions are effective in altering the natural history of nonketotic hyperglycinemia, but available therapeutic strategies may reduce the comorbidities associated with this condition. Clinicians should recognize this disease and initiate early evaluation and treatment to achieve the best possible outcome.