SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Clinical and genetic landscape of optic atrophy in 826 families: insights from 50 nuclear genes
    Y Zheng, P Wang, S Li, Y Long, Y Jiang, D Guo, X Jia… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/5/1604/7826698
    snippet: … In optic atrophy plus retinal degeneration, two sub-categories exist. One is marked by retinal vascular attenuation … The carriers of OPA3, RTN4IP1, FDXR and C12orf65 mutations in our …
    abstract: Hereditary optic neuropathies (HON) comprise a group of diseases caused by genetic defects in either the mitochondrial or nuclear genomes. The increasing availability of genetic testing has expanded the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of HON more broadly than previously recognized. The genetic and phenotypic landscape of HON is attributed to 50 nuclear genes, so we genetically analysed patients with suspected HON from a group of 4776 index cases following our previous study on 1516 probands with Leber's HON (LHON) who had mitochondrial DNA variants. Exome sequencing was performed in 473 probands diagnosed with nuclear gene-related HON (nHON) and 353 cases with unsolved LHON. Sequencing and variant interpretation of the 50 nuclear genes indicated that the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing for nHON was 31.50% (149/473), while it was markedly lower [1.42% (5/353)] for LHON patients without primary mtDNA mutations. The top five genes implicated in nHON in our in-house cohort were OPA1, WFS1, FDXR, ACO2 and AFG3L2, which accounted for 82.46% of probands. Although OPA1 was the most prevalent nHON-causative gene in both our cohort (53.25%) and a literature review (37.09%), the predominance of OPA1, WFS1 and FDXR differed significantly between our in-house cohort and the literature review (P-adjusted < 0.001). Fundus changes in nHON could be stratified into three categories: the most common was optic atrophy at examination (78.79%); the rarest was LHON-like optic atrophy (3.64%); and optic atrophy with concurrent retinal degeneration (17.57%), an independent risk factor for visual prognosis in nHON, occurred at an intermediate frequency. A systematic genotype-phenotype analysis highlighted different genetic contributions for ocular, extraocular neurological and extraocular non-neurological phenotypes. In addition, systemic variant analysis at the individual gene level suggested a revised interpretation of the pathogenicity of a WFS1 heterozygous truncation variant. This study provides a panoramic view of the genetic and phenotypic profiles of HON in a real-world study and the literature. The categories of nHON fundus phenotypes will benefit future studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying HON and targeted therapies. In addition to routine ophthalmic examinations, careful examination of extraocular symptoms and meaningful genetic counselling are warranted for patients with nHON.

[2] FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort: Unraveling expanded ocular phenotypes and genetic spectrum
    X Wei, H Li, T Zhu, F Yao, R Sui (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001448352300221X
    snippet: … Retinal dystrophy with attenuated retinal vessels appearing … FDXR gene include auditory neuropathy and optic atrophy, … as optic atrophy, retinal dystrophy, and retinal vascular occlusion…
    abstract: FDXR: associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. This study evaluated the ocular phenotypes and genetic features of patients with biallelic FDXR variants. Five individuals from unrelated non-consanguineous Chinese families with biallelic FDXR variants were identified using whole exome sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and co-segregation validation. In addition to optic atrophy and diverse extraocular manifestations, all patients presented with retinal dystrophy, and electroretinogram showed severely impaired cone and rod functions in their first decades. Three of the five patients showed attenuated retinal vessels that appeared as white lines on the fundus, and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) further revealed vascular abnormalities including delayed filling, completely occluded retinal vasculature, and severe retinal vascular nonperfusion of the peripheral retina. Five novel FDXR variants were identified: c.383C > T (p.A128V), c.963delG (p.R322fs*7), c.1052_1053delTC (p.L351Pfs*12), c.394-11T > G and c.1002+1G > A. Retinal dystrophy with attenuated retinal vessels appearing as white lines was observed in this cohort, and the FFA images revealed that retinal vascular occlusion could be a distinct clinical characteristic of FDXR-associated disease. Probands with FDXR revealed severe early onset ophthalmic features with rapid-progression, indicating the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, this is the first study to report FFA manifestations in an FDXR cohort, expanding the FDXR-associated ocular disease phenotype and genetic spectrum.

[3] Electrodiagnostic tests of the visual pathway and applications in neuro-ophthalmology
    A Calcagni, MM Neveu, N Jurkute, AG Robson (2024)
    PMID:38862643 DOI:10.1038/s41433-024-03154-6 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41433-024-03154-6
    snippet: … as Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy. The … of a central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) or branch retinal artery … FDXR-associated disease is a phenotypically …
    abstract: This article describes the main visual electrodiagnostic tests relevant to neuro-ophthalmology practice, including the visual evoked potential (VEP), and the full-field, pattern and multifocal electroretinograms (ffERG; PERG; mfERG). The principles of electrophysiological interpretation are illustrated with reference to acquired and inherited optic neuropathies, and retinal disorders that may masquerade as optic neuropathy, including ffERG and PERG findings in cone and macular dystrophies, paraneoplastic and vascular retinopathies. Complementary VEP and PERG recordings are illustrated in demyelinating, ischaemic, nutritional (B12), and toxic (mercury, cobalt, and ethambutol-related) optic neuropathies and inherited disorders affecting mitochondrial function such as Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy. The value of comprehensive electrophysiological phenotyping in syndromic diseases is highlighted in cases of SSBP1-related disease and ROSAH (Retinal dystrophy, Optic nerve oedema, Splenomegaly, Anhidrosis and Headache). The review highlights the value of different electrophysiological techniques, for the purposes of differential diagnosis and objective functional phenotyping.

[4] Mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative disorders: mechanisms and therapeutic advances
    Y Tong, JN He, L Zhou, J Zhang, BM Ho, L Du… (2026)
    PMID:42204067 DOI:10.1186/s43556-026-00480-x https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s43556-026-00480-x
    snippet: … -talk, through mutations in both genomes, constitutes the primary genetic etiology of disorders such as Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and dominant optic atrophy (DOA) [8]. …
    abstract: Mitochondrial dysfunction is a core pathogenic mechanism underlying a broad spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders, from Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases to inherited optic neuropathies and mitochondrial ataxias. This review provides a comprehensive analysis of how defects in mitochondrial and nuclear DNA converge to disrupt oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial dynamics, calcium homeostasis, and quality control pathways, leading to energy depletion, oxidative stress, and neuronal degeneration across multiple disease contexts. Building on this mechanistic foundation, we examine how these shared pathogenic principles manifest distinctly in major neurodegenerative diseases, while also discussing representative mitochondrial optic neuropathies as tractable disease models that have yielded critical mechanistic and therapeutic insights. We further review recent advances in diagnostic technologies that enhance our ability to detect and stratify mitochondrial pathologies for therapeutic intervention. On the therapeutic front, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of the rapidly evolving landscape, analyzing strategies ranging from metabolic modulators and antioxidants to pioneering gene-targeted therapies, organelle replacement approaches, and emerging epitranscriptomic interventions. Finally, we identify persistent challenges in clinical translation and outline pivotal future directions essential for developing effective, mechanism-informed combination therapies against mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegeneration.

[5] Adeno-Associated virus-based approaches for mitochondrial diseases: advances and challenges
    S Corrà, V Balmaceda, C Viscomi (2026)
    PMID:42056225 DOI:10.1038/s41380-026-03570-y https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-026-03570-y
    snippet: … B-Fdxr cDNA in a mouse model of lethal mitochondrial neuropathy with optic atrophy [95], carrying the p.Arg389Gln mutation led to robust transduction of both central and peripheral …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases, caused by mutations in either mitochondrial or nuclear DNA, are highly complex genetic disorders characterized by faulty oxidative phosphorylation. Adeno-associated virus (AAV)-based gene therapy with its broad and customizable tissue tropism achieved through natural and engineered serotypes offers a highly effective platform for delivering therapeutic genes to affected tissues. However, the intricate genetics and biology of mitochondria present unique challenges for the development of AAV-based therapies. While gene replacement therapy remains a viable strategy for correcting nuclear gene defects, mutations in mtDNA require specialized approaches, such as mitochondrially targeted, RNA-free base editors and nucleases capable of precise editing within the mitochondrial genome. As an alternative, allotopic expression, which involves expressing mitochondrial genes from the nuclear genome, is currently being evaluated in clinical trials but remains controversial, due to issues related to mitochondrial import and functional integration in the respiratory complexes. The clinical translation of AAV-mediated therapies for mitochondrial diseases still confronts several interrelated challenges, including efficient targeting of multiple affected organs, scalable and cost-effective vector manufacturing, and minimizing vector-associated toxicity. By integrating advanced genome editing technologies with sophisticated vector engineering and delivery strategies, AAV-based gene therapy stands as a transformative approach for addressing the broad and heterogeneous spectrum of primary mitochondrial disorders. Continued progress in overcoming current biological and technical barriers will be essential to realize the full therapeutic potential of AAVs.

[6] FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S001448352300221X
    snippet: by X Wei · 2023 · Cited by 5 — FDXR associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. Yi et al., 2023). attenuated retinal vessels,
    abstract: FDXR: associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. This study evaluated the ocular phenotypes and genetic features of patients with biallelic FDXR variants. Five individuals from unrelated non-consanguineous Chinese families with biallelic FDXR variants were identified using whole exome sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and co-segregation validation. In addition to optic atrophy and diverse extraocular manifestations, all patients presented with retinal dystrophy, and electroretinogram showed severely impaired cone and rod functions in their first decades. Three of the five patients showed attenuated retinal vessels that appeared as white lines on the fundus, and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) further revealed vascular abnormalities including delayed filling, completely occluded retinal vasculature, and severe retinal vascular nonperfusion of the peripheral retina. Five novel FDXR variants were identified: c.383C > T (p.A128V), c.963delG (p.R322fs*7), c.1052_1053delTC (p.L351Pfs*12), c.394-11T > G and c.1002+1G > A. Retinal dystrophy with attenuated retinal vessels appearing as white lines was observed in this cohort, and the FFA images revealed that retinal vascular occlusion could be a distinct clinical characteristic of FDXR-associated disease. Probands with FDXR revealed severe early onset ophthalmic features with rapid-progression, indicating the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, this is the first study to report FFA manifestations in an FDXR cohort, expanding the FDXR-associated ocular disease phenotype and genetic spectrum.

[7] FDXR-Associated Oculopathy: Congenital Amaurosis ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10137360 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10137360/
    snippet: by S Yi · 2023 · Cited by 13 — Variants in FDXR reportedly cause autosomal recessive auditory neuropathy and optic atrophy, expanding to retinal dystrophy.
    abstract: Variants in <i>FDXR</i> reportedly cause autosomal recessive auditory neuropathy and optic atrophy, expanding to retinal dystrophy. This study aimed to further clarify associated phenotypes. <i>FDXR</i> variants were selected from our in-house whole-exome sequencing dataset of 6397 families with different eye conditions. The clinical data of the identified patients were summarized. Biallelic pathogenic or likely pathogenic <i>FDXR</i> variants were identified in 11 unrelated patients, including 14 missense variants of which 10 were novel. Fundus observation showed complete optic disc pallor, silver wiring or severe attenuation of retinal vessels, and varying degrees of generalized retinal degeneration. Before the detection of <i>FDXR</i> variants, four patients were clinically diagnosed as congenital amaurosis due to the presence of nystagmus a few months after birth, while seven were diagnosed as early-onset severe retinal dystrophy due to the presence of nyctalopia and/or poor vision in early childhood. Biallelic <i>FDXR</i> variants are a frequent cause of congenital or early-onset severe retinal dystrophy, especially for patients with severe optic atrophy and retinal dystrophy in early childhood.

[8] FDXR-associated disease in a Chinese cohort
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/372529516_FDXR-associated_disease_in_a_Chinese_cohort_Unraveling_expanded_ocular_phenotypes_and_genetic_spectrum
    snippet: FDXR: associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. This study evaluated the ocular phenotypes and ...
    abstract: FDXR: associated disease is characterized by optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. This study evaluated the ocular phenotypes and genetic features of patients with biallelic FDXR variants. Five individuals from unrelated non-consanguineous Chinese families with biallelic FDXR variants were identified using whole exome sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and co-segregation validation. In addition to optic atrophy and diverse extraocular manifestations, all patients presented with retinal dystrophy, and electroretinogram showed severely impaired cone and rod functions in their first decades. Three of the five patients showed attenuated retinal vessels that appeared as white lines on the fundus, and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) further revealed vascular abnormalities including delayed filling, completely occluded retinal vasculature, and severe retinal vascular nonperfusion of the peripheral retina. Five novel FDXR variants were identified: c.383C > T (p.A128V), c.963delG (p.R322fs*7), c.1052_1053delTC (p.L351Pfs*12), c.394-11T > G and c.1002+1G > A. Retinal dystrophy with attenuated retinal vessels appearing as white lines was observed in this cohort, and the FFA images revealed that retinal vascular occlusion could be a distinct clinical characteristic of FDXR-associated disease. Probands with FDXR revealed severe early onset ophthalmic features with rapid-progression, indicating the importance of early diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, this is the first study to report FFA manifestations in an FDXR cohort, expanding the FDXR-associated ocular disease phenotype and genetic spectrum.

[9] Clinical and genetic landscape of optic atrophy in 826 families
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/148/5/1604/7826698
    snippet: by Y Zheng · 2025 · Cited by 16 — In optic atrophy plus retinal degeneration, two sub-categories exist. One is marked by retinal vascular attenuation as well as tapetoretinal degeneration.
    abstract: Hereditary optic neuropathies (HON) comprise a group of diseases caused by genetic defects in either the mitochondrial or nuclear genomes. The increasing availability of genetic testing has expanded the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of HON more broadly than previously recognized. The genetic and phenotypic landscape of HON is attributed to 50 nuclear genes, so we genetically analysed patients with suspected HON from a group of 4776 index cases following our previous study on 1516 probands with Leber's HON (LHON) who had mitochondrial DNA variants. Exome sequencing was performed in 473 probands diagnosed with nuclear gene-related HON (nHON) and 353 cases with unsolved LHON. Sequencing and variant interpretation of the 50 nuclear genes indicated that the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing for nHON was 31.50% (149/473), while it was markedly lower [1.42% (5/353)] for LHON patients without primary mtDNA mutations. The top five genes implicated in nHON in our in-house cohort were OPA1, WFS1, FDXR, ACO2 and AFG3L2, which accounted for 82.46% of probands. Although OPA1 was the most prevalent nHON-causative gene in both our cohort (53.25%) and a literature review (37.09%), the predominance of OPA1, WFS1 and FDXR differed significantly between our in-house cohort and the literature review (P-adjusted < 0.001). Fundus changes in nHON could be stratified into three categories: the most common was optic atrophy at examination (78.79%); the rarest was LHON-like optic atrophy (3.64%); and optic atrophy with concurrent retinal degeneration (17.57%), an independent risk factor for visual prognosis in nHON, occurred at an intermediate frequency. A systematic genotype-phenotype analysis highlighted different genetic contributions for ocular, extraocular neurological and extraocular non-neurological phenotypes. In addition, systemic variant analysis at the individual gene level suggested a revised interpretation of the pathogenicity of a WFS1 heterozygous truncation variant. This study provides a panoramic view of the genetic and phenotypic profiles of HON in a real-world study and the literature. The categories of nHON fundus phenotypes will benefit future studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying HON and targeted therapies. In addition to routine ophthalmic examinations, careful examination of extraocular symptoms and meaningful genetic counselling are warranted for patients with nHON.

[10] Attenuation of retinal blood vessels (Concept Id: C3278975)
    (authors not shown)
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/480605
    snippet: Patients experience reduced night vision, constriction of visual fields, and reduced visual acuity; optic disc pallor, attenuated retinal blood vessels, and ...