SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Differential diagnosis of lipoic acid synthesis defects
    F Tort, X Ferrer‐Cortes, A Ribes (2016)
    DOI:10.1007/s10545-016-9975-4 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1007/s10545-016-9975-4
    snippet: … showed high levels of lactate and glycine in body fluids and … , pointed to the precise function of NFU1 and BOLA3 in Fe-S … presentation of patients carrying GLRX5 mutations will be …
    abstract: Lipoic acid (LA) is an essential cofactor required for the activity of five multienzymatic complexes that play a central role in the mitochondrial energy metabolism: four 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes [pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH), 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (2-KGDH), and 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase (2-OADH)] and the glycine cleavage system (GCS). LA is synthesized in a complex multistep process that requires appropriate function of the mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis (mtFASII) and the biogenesis of iron-sulphur (Fe-S) clusters. Defects in the biosynthesis of LA have been reported to be associated with multiple and severe defects of the mitochondrial energy metabolism. In recent years, disease-causing mutations in genes encoding for proteins involved in LA metabolism have been reported: NFU1, BOLA3, IBA57, LIAS, GLRX5, LIPT1, ISCA2, and LIPT2. These studies represented important progress in understanding the pathophysiology and molecular bases underlying these disorders. Here we review current knowledge regarding involvement of LA synthesis defects in human diseases with special emphasis on the diagnostic strategies for these disorders. The clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients with LA synthesis defects are discussed and a workup for the differential diagnosis proposed.

[2] GLRX5-associated [Fe-S] cluster biogenesis disorder: further characterisation of the neurological phenotype and long-term outcome
    BP Sankaran, S Gupta, M Tchan, B Devanapalli… (2021)
    DOI:10.1186/s13023-021-02073-z https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13023-021-02073-z
    snippet: … in these patients namely spastic paraplegia. lExtended follow up … and CSF Glycine with a normal CSF/plasma Glycine ratio. … phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1. Orphanet J Rare …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Identification and characterisation of monogenic causes of complex neurological phenotypes are important for genetic counselling and prognostication. Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in the gene encoding GLRX5, a protein involved in the early steps of Fe-S cluster biogenesis, are rare and cause two distinct phenotypes: isolated sideroblastic anemia and a neurological phenotype with variant non-ketotic hyperglycinemia. In this study, we analysed the evolution of clinical and MRI findings and long-term outcome of patients with GLRX5 mutations.<h4>Methods</h4>Four patients from three Australian families of Lebanese descent were identified. All patients presented in childhood and were followed up into adult life through multiple clinical assessments. All were prescribed sodium benzoate.<h4>Results</h4>All patients (all females, age range 18-56 years) showed a complex neurological phenotype characterised by varying combinations of spastic paraparesis, length-dependent motor/sensory-motor axonal polyneuropathy, and psychiatric disturbances with variable intellectual disability. All had non-ketotic hyperglycinemia and a homozygous pathogenic c.151_153delAAG (p.K51del) change in GLRX5. Motor disability gradually progressed reaching moderate disability during adolescence and moderately severe disability during adult life. The major MRI finding was the upper cervical spinal cord signal changes with contrast enhancement noted in all and additional leukoencephalopathy in one. On follow up MRI, the white matter lesions diminished on a subsequent scan and then remained static over time. The spinal cord showed gliotic changes. Two patients have previously demonstrated low pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency but none had plasma lactate elevation, nor biochemical evidence of branch-chain keto-dehydrogenase deficiency. Glycine levels reduced in patients that tolerated sodium benzoate, possibly stabilising clinical manifestations.<h4>Conclusions</h4>This report demonstrates that the p.K51del GLRX5 variant causes a distinct and predictable neurological phenotype. The clinical assessments spanning from childhood to adult life enable physicians to infer the natural history of GLRX5 related neurological disorder. There may be widespread metabolic consequences, and optimal management is unknown.

[3] Variant non ketotic hyperglycinemia is caused by mutations in LIAS, BOLA3 and the novel gene GLRX5
    PR Baker, MW Friederich, MA Swanson, T Shaikh… (2014)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/137/2/366/282721
    snippet: … development with childhood-onset spastic paraplegia, spinal lesion, … fluid glycine and cerebrospinal fluid:plasma glycine ratio, … Patients with NFU1 mutations developed lactic acidosis, …
    abstract: Patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity, but without mutations in AMT, GLDC or GCSH, the genes encoding its constituent proteins, constitute a clinical group which we call 'variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia'. We hypothesize that in some patients the aetiology involves genetic mutations that result in a deficiency of the cofactor lipoate, and sequenced genes involved in lipoate synthesis and iron-sulphur cluster biogenesis. Of 11 individuals identified with variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia, we were able to determine the genetic aetiology in eight patients and delineate the clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Mutations were identified in the genes for lipoate synthase (LIAS), BolA type 3 (BOLA3), and a novel gene glutaredoxin 5 (GLRX5). Patients with GLRX5-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia had normal development with childhood-onset spastic paraplegia, spinal lesion, and optic atrophy. Clinical features of BOLA3-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia include severe neurodegeneration after a period of normal development. Additional features include leukodystrophy, cardiomyopathy and optic atrophy. Patients with lipoate synthase-deficient variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia varied in severity from mild static encephalopathy to Leigh disease and cortical involvement. All patients had high serum and borderline elevated cerebrospinal fluid glycine and cerebrospinal fluid:plasma glycine ratio, and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity. They had low pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme activity but most did not have lactic acidosis. Patients were deficient in lipoylation of mitochondrial proteins. There were minimal and inconsistent changes in cellular iron handling, and respiratory chain activity was unaffected. Identified mutations were phylogenetically conserved, and transfection with native genes corrected the biochemical deficiency proving pathogenicity. Treatments of cells with lipoate and with mitochondrially-targeted lipoate were unsuccessful at correcting the deficiency. The recognition of variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia is important for physicians evaluating patients with abnormalities in glycine as this will affect the genetic causation and genetic counselling, and provide prognostic information on the expected phenotypic course.

[4] A review of multiple mitochondrial dysfunction syndromes, syndromes associated with defective Fe-S protein maturation
    E Lebigot, M Schiff, MP Golinelli (2021)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9059/9/8/989
    snippet: … 4S] cluster from GLRX5 to recipient mitochondrial Fe-S proteins with the help of NFU1. Both … with the SPOAN-like phenotype (spastic paraplegia, optic atrophy and peripheral neuropathy…

[5] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis from molecular understanding to clinical disease
    M Alfadhel, M Nashabat, QA Ali, K Hundallah (2017)
    https://nsj.org.sa/content/22/1/4.short
    snippet: … glutaredoxin 5 (GLRX5),21 iron-sulfur cluster scaffold (NFU1)22 … gene, and glycine cleavage system H gene. Sideroblastic … hereditary spastic paraplegia. Neurology 2015; 84: 659-667. …
    abstract: Iron_sulfur clusters (ISCs) are known to play a major role in various protein functions. Located in the mitochondria, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus, they contribute to various core cellular functions. Until recently, only a few human diseases related to mitochondrial ISC biogenesis defects have been described. Such diseases include Friedreich ataxia, combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 19, infantile complex II/III deficiency defect, hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis and mitochondrial muscle myopathy, lipoic acid biosynthesis defects, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia due to glutaredoxin 5 gene defect. Disorders of mitochondrial import, export and translation, including sideroblastic anemia with ataxia, EVEN-PLUS syndrome and mitochondrial complex I deficiency due to nucleotide-binding protein-like protein gene defect, have also been implicated in ISC biogenesis defects. With advances in next generation sequencing technologies, more disorders related to ISC biogenesis defects are expected to be elucidated. In this article, we aim to shed the light on mitochondrial ISC biogenesis, related proteins and their function, pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes of related disorders, diagnostic approach, and future implications.

[6] GLRX5-associated [Fe-S] cluster biogenesis disorder - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34732213 DOI:10.1186/s13023-021-02073-z PMC8565018 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8565018/
    snippet: by BP Sankaran · 2021 · Cited by 8 — ... glycine with CSF: plasma glycine ratio of 0.04 (Table 1). A cranial CT ... New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1. Orphanet J ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Identification and characterisation of monogenic causes of complex neurological phenotypes are important for genetic counselling and prognostication. Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in the gene encoding GLRX5, a protein involved in the early steps of Fe-S cluster biogenesis, are rare and cause two distinct phenotypes: isolated sideroblastic anemia and a neurological phenotype with variant non-ketotic hyperglycinemia. In this study, we analysed the evolution of clinical and MRI findings and long-term outcome of patients with GLRX5 mutations.<h4>Methods</h4>Four patients from three Australian families of Lebanese descent were identified. All patients presented in childhood and were followed up into adult life through multiple clinical assessments. All were prescribed sodium benzoate.<h4>Results</h4>All patients (all females, age range 18-56 years) showed a complex neurological phenotype characterised by varying combinations of spastic paraparesis, length-dependent motor/sensory-motor axonal polyneuropathy, and psychiatric disturbances with variable intellectual disability. All had non-ketotic hyperglycinemia and a homozygous pathogenic c.151_153delAAG (p.K51del) change in GLRX5. Motor disability gradually progressed reaching moderate disability during adolescence and moderately severe disability during adult life. The major MRI finding was the upper cervical spinal cord signal changes with contrast enhancement noted in all and additional leukoencephalopathy in one. On follow up MRI, the white matter lesions diminished on a subsequent scan and then remained static over time. The spinal cord showed gliotic changes. Two patients have previously demonstrated low pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency but none had plasma lactate elevation, nor biochemical evidence of branch-chain keto-dehydrogenase deficiency. Glycine levels reduced in patients that tolerated sodium benzoate, possibly stabilising clinical manifestations.<h4>Conclusions</h4>This report demonstrates that the p.K51del GLRX5 variant causes a distinct and predictable neurological phenotype. The clinical assessments spanning from childhood to adult life enable physicians to infer the natural history of GLRX5 related neurological disorder. There may be widespread metabolic consequences, and optimal management is unknown.

[7] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272374033_New_spastic_paraplegia_phenotype_associated_to_mutation_of_NFU1
    snippet: ... NFU1, GLRX5, ISCA2, IBA57, LIPT1 and LIPT2. When these affect glycine metabolism, they are referred to as variant NKH. Patients with severe ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[8] A leaky splicing mutation in NFU1 is associated with a particular ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:26688339 DOI:10.1016/j.mito.2015.12.004 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0e2d93e9912814bb40d148af941c57bae74eff4
    snippet: New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1 ... GLRX5. Peter R BakerMarisa W ... glycine as this will affect the genetic causation ...
    abstract: Mutations in NFU1 were recently identified in patients with fatal encephalopathy. NFU1 is an iron-sulfur cluster protein necessary for the activity of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I-II and the synthesis of lipoic acid. We report two NFU1 compound heterozygous individuals with normal complex I and lipoic acid-dependent enzymatic activities and low, but detectable, levels of lipoylated proteins. We demonstrated a leaky splicing regulation due to a splice site mutation (c.545+5G>A) that produces small amounts of wild type NFU1 mRNA that might result in enough protein to partially lipoylate and restore the activity of lipoic acid-dependent enzymes and the assembly and activity of complex I. These results allowed us to gain insights into the molecular basis underlying this disease and should be considered for the diagnosis of NFU1 patients.

[9] The History and Nosology of the Glycine Disorders ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41521798 DOI:10.1002/jimd.70138 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jimd.70138
    snippet: Hence, some of the 'late-acting' iron–sulphur cluster disorders (associated with the genes NFU1, BOLA3, GLRX5 ... spastic paraplegia, optic ...
    abstract: Despite its simple chemical structure, glycine plays a complex role in the body. The glycine cleavage system regulates brain glycine levels and is a key one-carbon donor to folate. Its metabolism is tightly integrated with that of serine. In addition to its biochemical role, glycine functions as a neurotransmitter and neuromodulator. Primary defects in the glycine cleavage system have long been known to cause human disease with a primarily neurological phenotype, and this was labelled as 'nonketotic hyperglycinaemia' in 1968. With increasing availability of molecular testing, many additional genetic conditions became apparent, as well as non-genetic factors that cause hyperglycinaemia. There is now a much greater appreciation of the marked clinical impact of this heterogeneity. The previous terminology of 'classical' and 'atypical' nonketotic hyperglycinaemia does not adequately address these numerous genetic aetiologies, nor does it account for the phenotypic spectrum within individual genetic disorders. We provide here a clinically relevant classification of the glycine encephalopathies, based on the underlying genetic aetiology and its relation to the glycine cleavage system. Characteristic clinical and biochemical features of each condition, as well as non-genetic phenocopies that cause hyperglycinaemia, are discussed in detail. This provides a readily usable framework for clinicians when faced with a patient with elevated glycine levels.

[10] Nonketotic hyperglycinaemia and lipoate deficiency disorders
    JLK Van Hove, R Van Coster (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/978-3-662-63123-2_23 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-662-63123-2_23
    snippet: … stable spastic paraparesis or tetraparesis [12, 13]. Cerebral … cluster synthesis (NFU1, ISCA2, IBA57, BOLA3) a deficiency of … in LIAS, BOLA3 and the novel gene GLRX5. Brain 137:366–…