SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Mutations in NKX6-2 cause progressive spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, N Patel, J Vandrovcova, MN Zanetti… (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30196-9
    snippet: … In this study, we report three families with individuals affected by autosomal-recessive … causal variants in NKX6-2 (MIM: 605955). Unrelated individuals from three families were included …
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[2] Viorica Chelban,* Nisha Patel, 2, 15 Jana Vandrovcova, M. Natalia Zanetti, 3 David S. Lynch, Mina Ryten, 9, 11 Juan A. Botıa, 9, 10 Oscar Bello, 3 Eloise …
    JE Rothman, FS Alkuraya, H Houlden (2017)
    https://iris.unime.it/retrieve/handle/11570/3133952/221414/NKX6.pdf
    snippet: … network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in … role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations … In this study, we report three families with individuals affected …

[3] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6‐2‐related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, M Alsagob, K Kloth… (2020)
    DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ene.14082
    snippet: … 10, shared by affected individuals and containing … three families) of hypomyelination due to NKX6-2 mutations from the same research group suggesting a significant burden of NKX6-2 …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[4] Hematological findings associated with tubulin‐folding cofactors D‐related encephalopathy: Expanding the phenotype
    A Al‐Bakheet, M Tohary, S Khan, A Chedrawi… (2021)
    PMID:33506509 DOI:10.1111/cge.13932 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13932
    snippet: … The affected individuals are represented by filled symbols … Three families that harbor the same missense variant have … neurological phenotype unlike the other affected individuals with p.…
    abstract: The dysfunction of microtubules (α/β-tubulin polymers) underlies a wide range of nervous system genetic abnormalities. Defects in TBCD, a tubulin-folding cofactor, cause diseases highlighted with early-onset encephalopathy with or without neurodegeneration, intellectual disability, seizures, microcephaly and tetraparaperesis. Utilizing various molecular methods, we describe nine patients from four unrelated families with two novel exon 18 variants in TBCD exhibiting the typical neurological phenotype of the disease. Interestingly, all the investigated patients had previously unreported hematological findings in the form of neutropenia and mild degree of anemia and thrombocytopenia. In addition to delineating the neurological phenotype in several patients with TBCD variants, our study stresses on the new association of neutropenia, in particular, with the disease.

[5] Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28575651/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 66 — We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[6] Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929717301969
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 66 — ... Chelban ... Whole-exome sequencing was conducted in the three families independently and included samples from parents and from affected and ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[7] related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:31509304 DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://openaccess.sgul.ac.uk/111215/1/Chelban_et_al-2019-European_Journal_of_Neurology.pdf
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2020 · Cited by 34 — Chelban, V., et al., Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia and. Hypomyelination. Am J Hum Genet, 2017. 100(6): p. 969-977. 3. Dorboz, I., et al ...
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[8] Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC5473715 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5473715/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 65 — In this study, we report three families with individuals affected by autosomal-recessive spastic ataxia and for whom MRI showed brain ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[9] NKX6-2-related disorder
    V Chelban, N Kaya, F Alkuraya, H Houlden (2018)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk531509/
    snippet: … Once the NKX6-2 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier … To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with NKX6-2-…

[10] NKX6-2 Disease in Two Unrelated Patients with Early-Onset Spastic Quadriplegia and Diffuse Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophy
    S Shurrab, D Cordeiro, S Mercimek (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666459323000069
    snippet: … We report two individuals from two unrelated families who … affected with NKX6-2 related disorders, the light blue circle is … unidentified until 2017 when the implications of NKX6-2 biallelic …