SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The 2026 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2026)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(25)01030-2/abstract
    snippet: … Its purpose is to provide the reader of Neuromuscular Disorders with an updated list of monogenic neuromuscular diseases due to a primary defect residing in the nuclear genome. It …

[2] The 2025 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2025)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(24)01757-7/abstract
    snippet: … Its purpose is to provide the reader of Neuromuscular Disorders with an updated list of monogenic neuromuscular diseases due to a primary defect residing in the nuclear genome. It …

[3] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular … disorder with dysmorphic facies (OMIM #620775) is now indexed in OMIM and has been …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[4] The 2025 version of the gene table of neuromuscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:39889355 DOI:10.1016/j.nmd.2024.105261 https://hal.science/hal-04926625/document
    snippet: by L Benarroch · 2025 · Cited by 16 — neuromuscular ... dysmorphic facies. 5.17. AR. NMDF. 620775. 6q14.1. FILIP1. 607307. Filamin A-interacting protein 1. Schnabel et al (2023). Roos ...

[5] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by … manifestation of neurological diseases which in the case of FLNA … of disease features found in our cohort FILIP1-patients …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[6] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … giving rise to a congenital disorder with multiple joint contractures in our patient cohort. In summary, we provide clinical and genetic evidence that bi-allelic deleterious variants in the …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[7] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … presents with congenital hypotonia, dysmorphic features, … cohort, 18% of RYR1-related congenital myopathy patients … More recently, FILIP1 loss-of-function variants were identified …

[8] Velopharyngeal insufficiency
    A Young, A Spinner (2020)
    PMID:42736637 DOI:10.1177/10556656261486599 https://europepmc.org/article/nbk/nbk563149
    snippet: … patients present with dysmorphic facies, conotruncal cardiac defects, hypocalcemic hypoparathyroidism, T-cell mediated immune deficiency and variable neuromuscular … A genetic …
    abstract: ObjectiveVelopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI) is a form of velopharyngeal dysfunction caused by anatomical anomalies in the velopharyngeal sphincter. Although genetic causes such as 22q11 deletion syndrome are recognised, the broader genetic basis remains poorly understood. This study investigated the genetic aetiology of VPI.DesignWe conducted a phenotypic search on the DECIPHER database using the term 'Velopharyngeal Insufficiency' and identified genetic variants in these patients. These were classified using ACMG guidelines. Literature searches and network analyses examined gene roles and their contribution to sphincter development.PatientsWe identified 66 patients on DECIPHER with VPI.ResultsNinety-five percent of patients presented with syndromic VPI, commonly observed phenotypes included neurodevelopmental abnormalities and facial dysmorphology. Five patients (7.6%) had cleft palate. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were identified in 56.1% of those with reported genetic variants (32/57); 26.3% through copy number variants and 29.8% through sequence variants (SVs). Chromosome 22q11.2 aberrations were the most frequently observed finding in the cohort; 7 patients carried deletions and 2 carried duplications. Independent truncating SVs in <i>KMT2A</i> and <i>CAMTA1</i> were observed in multiple individuals. Network analyses and literature review of 26 genes prioritised for potential relevance to VPI revealed 2 broad functions: regulating gene expression and signalling pathways, contributing to palatogenesis and cranial-base development.ConclusionThis study demonstrates a high rate of pathogenic or likely pathogenic genetic findings in a syndromic VPI cohort. The findings highlight several recurrent genomic regions and biologically plausible genes that may contribute to VPI beyond the well-known 22q11 deletion syndrome.

[9] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10545528 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10545528/
    snippet: by A Roos · 2023 · Cited by 10 — The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular ...
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[10] Neuromuscular Disorder, Congenital, with Dysmorphic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/neuromuscular_disorder_congenital_with_dysmorphic_facies
    snippet: An autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder characterized by multiple congenital joint contractures, hypotonia, muscle weakness, and facial dysmorphism.