SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … Here we describe 25 individuals with heterozygous, missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and phenotypes associated these variants with …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
    X Lu, K Ng, F Pinto e Vairo, J Collins, R Cohn… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01576-0
    snippet: … Nine de novo PTVs and 3 missense variants of MSL2 were described from these cohorts with DD. In study by Zhang et al. [12], a targeted sequencing of 547 genes was performed for …
    abstract: Numerous large scale genomic studies have uncovered rare but recurrent pathogenetic variants in a significant number of genes encoding epigenetic machinery in cases with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) especially autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These findings provide strong support for the functional importance of epigenetic regulators in neurodevelopment. After the clinical genomics evaluation of the patients using exome sequencing, we have identified, three novel protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the MSL2 gene (OMIM: 614802) which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme. MSL2 modifies chromatin through both mono-ubiquitination of histone 2B on lysine 34 (K34) and acetylation of histone H4 on lysine 16 (K16). We reported first time the detailed clinical features associated with 3 MSL2 PTVs. There are 15 PTVs (13 de novo) reported from the large genomics studies (12 cases) or ClinVar (3 cases) of NDD, ASD, and developmental disorders (DD) but the specific clinical features for these cases are not described. Taken together, our descriptions of dysmorphic face and other features support the causal role of MSL2 in a likely syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder and add MSL2 to a growing list of epigenetic genes implicated in ASD.

[3] Targeted sequencing and integrative analysis to prioritize candidate genes in neurodevelopmental disorders
    Y Zhang, T Wang, Y Wang, K Xia, J Li, Z Sun (2021)
    PMID:33860439 DOI:10.1007/s12035-021-02377-y https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12035-021-02377-y
    snippet: … We highlighted MSL2, which carried two de novo protein-truncating variants (p.L192Vfs*3 … [37] and missense variants with ReVe ≤ 0.7 were excluded. Only protein-truncating variants (…
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a group of diseases characterized by high heterogeneity and frequently co-occurring symptoms. The mutational spectrum in patients with NDDs is largely incomplete. Here, we sequenced 547 genes from 1102 patients with NDDs and validated 1271 potential functional variants, including 108 de novo variants (DNVs) in 78 autosomal genes and seven inherited hemizygous variants in six X chromosomal genes. Notably, 36 of these 78 genes are the first to be reported in Chinese patients with NDDs. By integrating our genetic data with public data, we prioritized 212 NDD candidate genes with FDR < 0.1, including 17 novel genes. The novel candidate genes interacted or were co-expressed with known candidate genes, forming a functional network involved in known pathways. We highlighted MSL2, which carried two de novo protein-truncating variants (p.L192Vfs*3 and p.S486Ifs*11) and was frequently connected with known candidate genes. This study provides the mutational spectrum of NDDs in China and prioritizes 212 NDD candidate genes for further functional validation and genetic counseling.

[4] Contribution of retrotransposition to developmental disorders
    EJ Gardner, E Prigmore, G Gallone, P Danecek… (2019)
    PMID:31604926 DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-12520-y https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-12520-y
    snippet: … genome-wide germline ME mutation rate and selective constraint and demonstrate that coding RT events have signatures of purifying selection equivalent to those of truncating …
    abstract: Mobile genetic Elements (MEs) are segments of DNA which can copy themselves and other transcribed sequences through the process of retrotransposition (RT). In humans several disorders have been attributed to RT, but the role of RT in severe developmental disorders (DD) has not yet been explored. Here we identify RT-derived events in 9738 exome sequenced trios with DD-affected probands. We ascertain 9 de novo MEs, 4 of which are likely causative of the patient's symptoms (0.04%), as well as 2 de novo gene retroduplications. Beyond identifying likely diagnostic RT events, we estimate genome-wide germline ME mutation rate and selective constraint and demonstrate that coding RT events have signatures of purifying selection equivalent to those of truncating mutations. Overall, our analysis represents a comprehensive interrogation of the impact of retrotransposition on protein coding genes and a framework for future evolutionary and disease studies.

[5] Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense-mediated decay uncovers candidate Mendelian diseases
    RI Torene, MJG Sacoto, F Millan, Z Zhang… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00402-0
    snippet: … Protein-truncating variants escaping nonsense-mediated … We examined individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders … Frameshift and missense variants in HDAC2 and MSL2 have …
    abstract: Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 3' end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent-offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one high-confidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease-associated genes and identify potentially novel disease-associated genes.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — Here we describe 25 individuals with heterozygous, missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380990091_MSL2_variants_lead_to_a_neurodevelopmental_syndrome_with_lack_of_coordination_epilepsy_specific_dysmorphisms_and_a_distinct_episignature
    snippet: ... MSL2. One missense variant, p ... Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] MSL2 gene MSL Complex Subunit 2
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/MSL2
    snippet: 136,194,995 (-), Missense. 3773655. Likely ... Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders.

[9] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … , rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain … were nonsense or frameshift, with only two missense variants … to a non-functional truncated protein, compatible with the …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[10] The molecular and genetic mechanisms of neurodevelopmental disorders
    MR Mulligan
    https://ourarchive.otago.ac.nz/esploro/outputs/doctoral/The-molecular-and-genetic-mechanisms-of/9926766644901891?institution=64OTAGO_INST
    snippet: … A third variant was identified in a novel disease gene, MSL2, … Five truncating variants and two larger-scale gene disruptions … However, seven missense variants and a terminal exon …