SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B‐Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder and the 12q24. 31 Microdeletion Syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, TC Hsieh, M Koetsier… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70169
    snippet: … In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance … Congenital heart defects were present in 12q24.31 (3/12) and KDM2B (14/18 CxxC, 3/5 pLOF) cohorts…
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[2] Lessons learned from large-scale, first-tier clinical exome sequencing in a highly consanguineous population
    D Monies, M Abouelhoda, M Assoum… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30159-4
    snippet: … with associated intellectual disability and epilepsy … of ectodermal dysplasia with congenital heart disease on the basis … such occurrences as ‘‘incomplete penetrance’’ should be carefully …

[3] Discovery of a DNA methylation profile in individuals with Sifrim-Hitz-Weiss syndrome
    K Karimi, Y Lichtenstein, J Reilly, H McConkey… (2025)
    PMID:39824190 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.12.020 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00463-4
    snippet: … SIHIWES, including mild to moderate intellectual disability (ID; 13/… causing with incomplete penetrance and a somewhat different … Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental …
    abstract: Pathogenic heterozygous variants in CHD4 cause Sifrim-Hitz-Weiss syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with brain anomalies, heart defects, macrocephaly, hypogonadism, and additional features with variable expressivity. Most individuals have non-recurrent missense variants, complicating variant interpretation. A few were reported with truncating variants, and their role in disease is unclear. DNA methylation episignatures have emerged as highly accurate diagnostic biomarkers in a growing number of rare diseases. We aimed to study evidence for the existence of a CHD4-related DNA methylation episignature. We collected blood DNA samples and/or clinical information from 39 individuals with CHD4 variants, including missense and truncating variants. Genomic DNA methylation analysis was performed on 28 samples. We identified a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature in samples with pathogenic missense variants within the ATPase/helicase domain. The same episignature was observed in a family with variable expressivity, a de novo variant near the PHD domain, variants of uncertain significance within the ATPase/helicase domain, and a sample with compound heterozygous variants. DNA methylation data revealed higher percentages of shared probes with BAFopathies, CHD8, and the terminal ADNP variants encoding a protein known to form the ChAHP complex with CHD4. Truncating variants, as well as a sample with a recurrent pathogenic missense variant, exhibited DNA methylation profiles distinct from the ATPase/helicase domain episignature. These DNA methylation differences, together with the distinct clinical features observed in those individuals, provide preliminary evidence for clinical and molecular sub-types in the CHD4-related disorder.

[4] Histone lysine methylases and demethylases in the landscape of human developmental disorders
    V Faundes, WG Newman, L Bernardini… (2018)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30466-4
    snippet: … an overgrowth syndrome with intellectual disability. We further … , bipolar disorder, and congenital heart anomalies, but their … PTVs might have incomplete penetrance or that these genes …
    abstract: Histone lysine methyltransferases (KMTs) and demethylases (KDMs) underpin gene regulation. Here we demonstrate that variants causing haploinsufficiency of KMTs and KDMs are frequently encountered in individuals with developmental disorders. Using a combination of human variation databases and existing animal models, we determine 22 KMTs and KDMs as additional candidates for dominantly inherited developmental disorders. We show that KMTs and KDMs that are associated with, or are candidates for, dominant developmental disorders tend to have a higher level of transcription, longer canonical transcripts, more interactors, and a higher number and more types of post-translational modifications than other KMT and KDMs. We provide evidence to firmly associate KMT2C, ASH1L, and KMT5B haploinsufficiency with dominant developmental disorders. Whereas KMT2C or ASH1L haploinsufficiency results in a predominantly neurodevelopmental phenotype with occasional physical anomalies, KMT5B mutations cause an overgrowth syndrome with intellectual disability. We further expand the phenotypic spectrum of KMT2B-related disorders and show that some individuals can have severe developmental delay without dystonia at least until mid-childhood. Additionally, we describe a recessive histone lysine-methylation defect caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous KDM5B variants and resulting in a recognizable syndrome with developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, and camptodactyly. Collectively, these results emphasize the significance of histone lysine methylation in normal human development and the importance of this process in human developmental disorders. Our results demonstrate that systematic clinically oriented pathway-based analysis of genomic data can accelerate the discovery of rare genetic disorders.

[5] A data-driven framework for CNV pathogenicity classification
    AS Wetzel (2022)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/e08b73dc4cd9f5629593d2a847921107/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … (MMS) is heterogeneous but often involves intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, … clinical laboratories, phenotypic heterogeneity, incomplete penetrance, and the lack of …

[6] Facial characteristics of individuals with KDM2B ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Facial-characteristics-of-individuals-with-KDM2B-pathogenic-variants-A-C-Individuals-of_fig2_365038619
    snippet: ... (KDM2B) variants have been associated with developmental delay and ... intellectual disability, congenital heart defects, and facial dysmorphism. ...

[7] KDM2B variants in the CxxC domain impair its DNA-binding ability and cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, MA Hadders… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/34/16/1353/8150966
    snippet: … All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the … to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were …
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[8] Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its associated DNA methylation signature
    …, E Van Binsbergen, MJ Van Den Boogaard… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S109836002200942X
    snippet: … present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD.<h4>Methods</h4>Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature.<h4>Results</h4>We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.

[9] KDM2B forms a variant PRC1 complex in mouse ESCs ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/KDM2B-forms-a-variant-PRC1-complex-in-mouse-ESCs-containing-RING1B-and-PCGF1-A-To_fig4_320491467
    snippet: Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital ...

[10] Vanda McNiven's research works | McMaster University, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Vanda-McNiven-2082261499
    snippet: Vanda McNiven's 32 research items with 359 citations and 3750 reads, including: KMT2A and KMT2B episignatures address diagnostic challenges associated with ...