SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Disruptions in axonal lysosome transport and its contribution to neurological disease
    JM Paumier, S Gowrishankar (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0955067424000619
    snippet: … to neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases. … and the adaptor protein JIP3/MAPK8IP3 to these diseases and … the axonal organelles that build up due to retrograde transport …
    abstract: Lysosomes are central to the maintenance of protein and organelle homeostasis in cells. Optimal lysosome function is particularly critical for neurons which are long-lived, non-dividing and highly polarized with specialized compartments such as axons and dendrites with distinct architecture, cargo, and turnover requirements. In recent years, there has been a growing appreciation for the role played by axonal lysosome transport in regulating neuronal development, its maintenance and functioning. Perturbations to optimal axonal lysosome abundance leading to either strong accumulations or dearth of lysosomes are both linked to altered neuronal health and functioning. In this review we highlight how two critical regulators of axonal lysosome transport and abundance, the small GTPase Arl8 and the adaptor protein JIP3, aid in maintaining axonal lysosome homeostasis and how alterations to their levels and activity could contribute to neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases.

[2] De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual disability with variable brain anomalies
    K Platzer, H Sticht, SL Edwards, W Allen… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(18)30459-2
    snippet: … function and lysosome accumulation in the axons. We then … of MAPK8IP3-related neurodevelopmental disorders … of the spectrum of MAPK8IP3-related neurodevelopmental …
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[3] A toxic gain-of-function variant in MAPK8IP3 provides insights into JIP3 cellular roles
    W Zhang, S Mittal, R Thomas, A Foroughishafiei… (2025)
    PMC12016931 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12016931/
    snippet: … of neurodevelopmental disorders associated with MAPK8IP3 … (MAPK8IP3) gene results in lysosome-filled axonal swellings … from the axon terminal to the cell body (retrograde transport) (…
    abstract: Mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 interacting protein 3 (MAPK8IP3) gene encoding a protein called JIP3 is an adaption protein of the kinesin-1 complex known to play a role in axonal transport of cargo. Mutations in the gene have been linked to severe neurodevelopmental disorders, resulting in developmental delay, intellectual disability, ataxia, tremor, autism, seizures, and visual impairment. A patient who has a missense mutation in the MAPK8IP3 gene (c. 1714 C>T, Arg578Cys) (R578C) manifests dystonia, gross motor delay, and developmental delay. Here, we showed that the mutation was a toxic gain-of-function mutation that altered the interactome of JIP3; disrupted axonal transport of late endosomes; increased signaling via c-Jun N-terminal kinase, resulting in apoptosis; and disrupted dopamine receptor 1 signaling while not affecting dopamine receptor 2 signaling. Furthermore, in the presence of the mutant protein, we showed that an 80% reduction of mutant JIP3 and a 60% reduction of WT JIP3 by non-allele-selective phosphorothioate-modified antisense oligonucleotides was well tolerated by several types of cells in vitro. Our study identifies what we believe to be several important new roles for JIP3 and provides important insights for therapeutic approaches, including antisense oligonucleotide reduction of JIP3.

[4] AP-4 regulates neuronal lysosome composition, function, and transport via regulating export of critical lysosome receptor proteins at the trans-Golgi network
    P Majumder, D Edmison, C Rodger, S Patel… (2022)
    DOI:10.1091/mbc.E21-09-0473 https://www.molbiolcell.org/doi/abs/10.1091/mbc.E21-09-0473
    snippet: … of retrograde transport machinery to the organelle. These findings of axonal lysosome buildup … Last, we show that loss of AP-4 causes LAMP1-positive organelles as well as MAPK8IP3/…
    abstract: The adaptor protein complex-4 or AP-4 is known to mediate autophagosome maturation through regulating sorting of transmembrane cargo such as ATG9A at the Golgi. There is a need to understand AP-4 function in neurons, as mutations in any of its four subunits cause a complex form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) with intellectual disability. While AP-4 has been implicated in regulating trafficking and distribution of cargo such as ATG9A and APP, little is known about its effect on neuronal lysosomal protein traffic, lysosome biogenesis, and function. In this study, we demonstrate that in human iPSC-derived neurons AP-4 regulates lysosome composition, function, and transport via regulating the export of critical lysosomal receptors, including Sortilin 1, from the trans-Golgi network to endo-lysosomes. Additionally, loss of AP-4 causes endo-lysosomes to stall and build up in axonal swellings potentially through reduced recruitment of retrograde transport machinery to the organelle. These findings of axonal lysosome buildup are highly reminiscent of those observed in Alzheimer's disease as well as in neurons modeling the most common form of HSP, caused by <i>spastin</i> mutations. Our findings implicate AP-4 as a critical regulator of neuronal lysosome biogenesis and altered lysosome function and axonal endo-lysosome transport as an underlying defect in AP-4-deficient HSP. Additionally, our results also demonstrate the utility of the human i<sup>3</sup>Neuronal model system in investigating neuronal phenotypes observed in AP-4-deficient mice and/or the human AP-4 deficiency syndrome.

[5] Aging differentially affects axonal autophagosome formation and maturation
    H Tsong, ELF Holzbaur, AKH Stavoe (2023)
    DOI:10.1080/15548627.2023.2236485 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/15548627.2023.2236485
    snippet: … with a late endosome or lysosome to generate an autolysosome… in the retrograde transport of AVs in the axon, driven by the … retrograde transport of autophagosomes via MAPK8IP3/JIP3 …
    abstract: Misregulation of neuronal macroautophagy/autophagy has been implicated in age-related neurodegenerative diseases. We compared autophagosome formation and maturation in primary murine neurons during development and through aging to elucidate how aging affects neuronal autophagy. We observed an age-related decrease in the rate of autophagosome formation leading to a significant decrease in the density of autophagosomes along the axon. Next, we identified a surprising increase in the maturation of autophagic vesicles in neurons from aged mice. While we did not detect notable changes in endolysosomal content in the distal axon during early aging, we did observe a significant loss of acidified vesicles in the distal axon during late aging. Interestingly, we found that autophagic vesicles were transported more efficiently in neurons from adult mice than in neurons from young mice. This efficient transport of autophagic vesicles in both the distal and proximal axon is maintained in neurons during early aging, but is lost during late aging. Our data indicate that early aging does not negatively impact autophagic vesicle transport nor the later stages of autophagy. However, alterations in autophagic vesicle transport efficiency during late aging reveal that aging differentially impacts distinct aspects of neuronal autophagy.<b>Abbreviations:</b> ACAP3: ArfGAP with coiled-coil, ankyrin repeat and PH domains 3; ARF6: ADP-ribosylation factor 6; ATG: autophagy related; AVs: autophagic vesicles; DCTN1/p150<sup>Glued</sup>: dynactin 1; DRG: dorsal root ganglia; GAP: GTPase activating protein; GEF: guanine nucleotide exchange factor; LAMP2: lysosomal-associated protein 2; LysoT: LysoTracker; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MAPK8IP1/JIP1: mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 interacting protein 1; MAPK8IP3/JIP3: mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 interacting protein 3; mCh: mCherry; PE: phosphatidylethanolamine.

[6] JIP3 links lysosome transport to regulation of multiple ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-021-02945-x
    snippet: by NM Rafiq · 2022 · Cited by 36 — the JIP3 (MAPK8IP3) gene result in lysosome-filled axonal swellings ... Conversely, efficient retrograde transport from the axon ...
    abstract: Lysosome axonal transport is important for the clearance of cargoes sequestered by the endocytic and autophagic pathways. Building on observations that mutations in the JIP3 (MAPK8IP3) gene result in lysosome-filled axonal swellings, we analyzed the impact of JIP3 depletion on the cytoskeleton of human neurons. Dynamic focal lysosome accumulations were accompanied by disruption of the axonal periodic scaffold (spectrin, F-actin and myosin II) throughout each affected axon. Additionally, axonal microtubule organization was locally disrupted at each lysosome-filled swelling. This local axonal microtubule disorganization was accompanied by accumulations of both F-actin and myosin II. These results indicate that transport of axonal lysosomes is functionally interconnected with mechanisms that control the organization and maintenance of the axonal cytoskeleton. They have potential relevance to human neurological disease arising from JIP3 mutations as well as for neurodegenerative diseases associated with the focal accumulations of lysosomes within axonal swellings such as Alzheimer's disease.

[7] JIP3 links lysosome transport to regulation of multiple ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2020.06.24.169219v2.full-text https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.24.169219v2.full-text
    snippet: Building on observations that mutations in the JIP3 (MAPK8IP3) gene result in lysosome ... Conversely, efficient retrograde transport from the axon ... axonal ...

[8] DISEASES - MAPK8IP3
    (authors not shown)
    https://diseases.jensenlab.org/Entity?documents=10&type1=9606&id1=ENSP00000481780&type2=-26&id2=DOID:0110802
    snippet: ... axonal swellings potentially through reduced recruitment of retrograde transport machinery to the organelle. These findings of axonal lysosome ... MAPK8IP3 ...

[9] Axonal transport of autophagosomes is regulated by ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37909920 DOI:10.1083/jcb.202301084 https://rupress.org/jcb/article/222/12/e202301084/276373/Axonal-transport-of-autophagosomes-is-regulated-by
    snippet: Mutations in the JIP3 gene (MAPK8IP3) result in a rare neurodevelopmental ... ARF6 regulates AV and lysosome retrograde transport. (A) Schematic ...
    abstract: Neuronal autophagosomes form and engulf cargos at presynaptic sites in the axon and are then transported to the soma to recycle their cargo. Autophagic vacuoles (AVs) mature en route via fusion with lysosomes to become degradatively competent organelles; transport is driven by the microtubule motor protein cytoplasmic dynein, with motor activity regulated by a sequential series of adaptors. Using lysate-based single-molecule motility assays and live-cell imaging in primary neurons, we show that JNK-interacting proteins 3 (JIP3) and 4 (JIP4) are activating adaptors for dynein that are regulated on autophagosomes and lysosomes by the small GTPases ARF6 and RAB10. GTP-bound ARF6 promotes formation of the JIP3/4-dynein-dynactin complex. Either knockdown or overexpression of RAB10 stalls transport, suggesting that this GTPase is also required to coordinate the opposing activities of bound dynein and kinesin motors. These findings highlight the complex coordination of motor regulation during organelle transport in neurons.

[10] Compound heterozygous variants in MAPK8IP3 were detected in severe congenital hypotonia mimicking lethal spinal muscular atrophy
    J Kárteszi, A Ziegler, M Tihanyi… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63340 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63340
    snippet: … grade axonal transport. Heterozygous de novo pathogenic variants in MAPK8IP3 result in a neurodevelopmental disorder … with the most severe increase of axonal lysosomal density in a …
    abstract: Mitogen-activated protein kinase 8-interacting protein 3 gene (MAPK8IP3) encodes the c-Jun-amino-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3 (JIP3) and is involved in retrograde axonal transport. Heterozygous de novo pathogenic variants in MAPK8IP3 result in a neurodevelopmental disorder with or without brain abnormalities and possible axonal peripheral neuropathy. Whole-exome sequencing was performed on an individual presenting with severe congenital muscle hypotonia of neuronal origin mimicking lethal spinal muscular atrophy. Compound heterozygous rare variants (a splice and a missense) were detected in MAPK8IP3, inherited from the healthy parents. Western blot analysis in a muscle biopsy sample showed a more than 60% decrease in JIP3 expression. Here, we suggest a novel autosomal recessive phenotype of a lower motor neuron disease caused by JIP3 deficiency.