SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals … the role of KDM2B-CxxC dysfunction in heart, kidney and eye … of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its …
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[2] KDM2B variants in the CxxC domain impair its DNA-binding ability and cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, MA Hadders… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/34/16/1353/8150966
    snippet: … neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and … workup of cardiac and renal ultrasound in each …
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[3] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series Supporting the CxxC Domain Phenotype With Emphasis on Ocular and Dermatologic Features
    A Gomes, Á Martín‐Rodríguez… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: … heterozygous variants in KDM2B and a specific methylation pattern (“episignature”) associated … in our individuals includes cardiac septal defects and unilateral renal agenesis. When …
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[4] Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its associated DNA methylation signature
    RH Van Jaarsveld, J Reilly, MC Cornips… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S109836002200942X
    snippet: … an episignature that is able to discriminate KDM2B variants from controls and classified these 13 variants as pathogenic (Table 1). Interestingly, the KDM2B associated episignature …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD.<h4>Methods</h4>Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature.<h4>Results</h4>We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.

[5] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B‐Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder and the 12q24. 31 Microdeletion Syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, TC Hsieh, M Koetsier… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70169
    snippet: … cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities (OMIM # 621474) [14]. … the KDM2Bspecific episignature. We analyse the genotype–phenotype correlations of the KDM2B- …
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[6] Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC9825659 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9825659/
    snippet: by RH van Jaarsveld · 2022 · Cited by 40 — Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and ... KDM2B episignature training set were used to train a CxxC-variant specific episignature.
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD.<h4>Methods</h4>Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature.<h4>Results</h4>We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.

[7] Entry - *609078 - LYSINE DEMETHYLASE 2B; KDM2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/609078
    snippet: Analysis of leukocyte-derived DNA from 4 patients showed the KDM2B-associated episignature. ... Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its ...

[8] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://read.qxmd.com/read/41946911/variants-in-the-cxxc-domain-of-the-epigenetic-regulator-kdm2b-support-its-role-in-developmental-eye-anomalies
    snippet: Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder ... (Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA ...
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[9] KDM2B Variants in the CxxC Domain Impair Its DNA-Binding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://digitalcommons.library.tmc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6468&context=uthgsbs_docs
    snippet: by ASE van Oirsouw · 2025 · Cited by 3 — ... KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder ... the KDM2B episignature [2], do not present with cardiovascular,.
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[10] Novel diagnostic DNA methylation episignatures expand and refine the epigenetic landscapes of Mendelian disorders
    MA Levy, H McConkey, J Kerkhof… (2022)
    https://www.cell.com/hgg-advances/fulltext/S2666-2477(21)00056-7
    snippet: … Overlapping clinical phenotypes and an expanding breadth … including the alternate disorder samples in the control cohort, we … KDM2B episignature, which could potentially be a result of …
    abstract: Overlapping clinical phenotypes and an expanding breadth and complexity of genomic associations are a growing challenge in the diagnosis and clinical management of Mendelian disorders. The functional consequences and clinical impacts of genomic variation may involve unique, disorder-specific, genomic DNA methylation episignatures. In this study, we describe 19 novel episignature disorders and compare the findings alongside 38 previously established episignatures for a total of 57 episignatures associated with 65 genetic syndromes. We demonstrate increasing resolution and specificity ranging from protein complex, gene, sub-gene, protein domain, and even single nucleotide-level Mendelian episignatures. We show the power of multiclass modeling to develop highly accurate and disease-specific diagnostic classifiers. This study significantly expands the number and spectrum of disorders with detectable DNA methylation episignatures, improves the clinical diagnostic capabilities through the resolution of unsolved cases and the reclassification of variants of unknown clinical significance, and provides further insight into the molecular etiology of Mendelian conditions.