SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 variants leading to a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability, developmental delay, motor issues, seizures, … phenotype: the MSL2associated …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] The predictive power of profiling the DNA methylome in human health and disease
    P Christofidou, CG Bell (2025)
    DOI:10.1080/17501911.2025.2500907 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17501911.2025.2500907
    snippet: Early and accurate diagnosis significantly improves the chances of disease survival. DNA methylation (5mC), the major DNA modification in the human genome, is now recognized as a …
    abstract: Early and accurate diagnosis significantly improves the chances of disease survival. DNA methylation (5mC), the major DNA modification in the human genome, is now recognized as a biomarker of immense clinical potential. This is due to its ability to delineate precisely cell-type, quantitate both internal and external exposures, as well as tracking chronological and biological components of the aging process. Here, we survey the current state of DNA methylation as a biomarker and predictor of traits and disease. This includes Epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) findings that inform Methylation Risk Scores (MRS), EpiScore long-term estimators of plasma protein levels, and machine learning (ML) derived DNA methylation clocks. These all highlight the significant benefits of accessible peripheral blood DNA methylation as a surrogate measure. However, detailed DNA methylation biopsy analysis in real-time is also empowering pathological diagnosis. Furthermore, moving forward, in this multi-omic and biobank scale era, novel insights will be enabled by the amplified power of increasing sample sizes and data integration.

[3] The evolving landscape of functional models of autism spectrum disorder
    J Ranjan, A Bhattacharya (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4409/14/12/908
    snippet: … , complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to … phenotypes, hindlimb clasping Rett syndrome, ASD, Epilepsy, regression [55,112,113,114,115,116] MSL2 …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1-3% of the population globally. Owing to its multifactorial origin, complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to faithfully model ASD. In essence, ASD is an umbrella term for a group of individually rare disorders, each risk gene accounting for <1% of cases, threaded by a set of overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral tests are considered a gold standard for ASD diagnosis, and several animal models (rodents, pigs, and non-human primates) have traditionally been used to study its molecular basis. These models recapitulate the human phenotype to a varying degree and have been indispensable to preclinical research, but they cannot be used to study human-specific features such as protracted neuronal maturation and cell-intrinsic attributes, posing serious limitations to translatability. Human stem cell-based models, both as monolayer 2D cultures and 3D organoids and assembloids, can circumvent these limitations. Generated from a patient's own reprogrammed cells, these can be used for testing therapeutic interventions that are more condition and patient relevant, targeting developmental windows where the intervention would be most effective. We discuss some of these advancements by comparing traditional and recent models of ASD.

[4] Homozygous Deletion of the Epigenetic Regulator PHF20 in Individuals With Neurodevelopmental Disorder
    SY Dagan, H Xuan, J Rips, E Paz (2025)
    DOI:10.1155/humu/6484814 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/humu/6484814
    snippet: … No clinical seizures were reported, and the electroencephalo… implicated in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Pathogenic … Finally, pathogenic variants in MSL2 lead to Karayol–Borroto…
    abstract: <i>PHF20</i> encodes plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20), a component of the KAT8-containing nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex that deposits acetylation on histone H4 to activate gene expression. We report two unrelated individuals with developmental delay, microcephaly, and distinctive facial features, in whom exome sequencing and chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> that segregated with the disease phenotype in their families. Breakpoint junction sequencing revealed an <i>Alu-Alu</i>-mediated deletion event. Western blot in cells from an affected individual showed undetectable PHF20, while levels of other NSL complex subunits were unaltered. Transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis revealed significant downregulation of gene pathways related to cell projection and neuronal development, associated with reduced histone H4K16 acetylation at these genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> leads to a neurodevelopmental syndrome, potentially through targeted epigenetic dysregulation and altered gene expression essential for neuronal development. Identifying additional families with biallelic <i>PHF20</i> variants will further delineate the phenotypic spectrum, and molecular studies in neuronal cell lines will be essential for understanding the disease mechanism.

[5] Accurate and cost-effective workflow integrating trio pooled-WES for novel gene discovery in neurodevelopmental disorders
    L López (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02075-0
    snippet: … The heterogeneity of NDDs is evident across clinical and phenotypic dimensions [2], … presented with epileptic encephalopathy or NDD associated with epilepsy, and 16 showed NDD …
    abstract: The broad genetic heterogeneity of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) makes their molecular diagnosis particularly challenging. In this context, Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES), specifically in a trio-based design, is a powerful strategy due to its ability to detect de novo variants, which are a major contributor to NDDs. However, its clinical implementation is often limited by its associated cost. In this study, we applied a sequential diagnostic workflow to a cohort of 221 individuals with syndromic NDDs and prior negative results from targeted sequencing. The workflow integrates initial solo-WES, followed by a second-tier trio-WES using pooled parental DNA (trio pooled-WES). Overall, this workflow achieved a diagnostic yield of 20.98% and led to the identification of 13 novel candidate genes. The pooling strategy was optimized and validated, demonstrating that trio pooled-WES retains the main advantages of conventional trio-WES while substantially reducing sequencing costs. These results support its implementation as a clinically applicable approach for the genetic diagnosis of NDDs.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature.
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pure.johnshopkins.edu/en/publications/msl2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-with-lack-of-/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — 111, No. 7, 11.07.2024, p. 1330-1351. ... Karayol, Remzi ; Borroto, Maria Carla ; Haghshenas, Sadegheh et al. / MSL2 variants lead to a ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholars.duke.edu/individual/pub1633872
    snippet: Karayol, R; Borroto, MC; Haghshenas, S; Namasivayam, A; Reilly ... MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[9] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: ... MSL2 gene in 25 unrelated patients with Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome. The mutation was shown to be de novo in 23 ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/MSL2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-Karayol-Borroto/3003d40e10d363a05c4c8608a401917b44a1b045
    snippet: MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature · Remzi Karayol, ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.