SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … interfere with ATPase activity (Calame et al., 2023; … nuclear localization of DHX9; these lead to a higher number of R-loops and double strand breaks, indicating that the function of DHX9 …

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 … Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] GA4GH phenopacket-driven characterization of genotype-phenotype correlations in Mendelian disorders
    L Rekerle, D Danis, F Rehburg, ASL Graefe… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00472-0
    snippet: Comprehensively characterizing genotype-phenotype correlations (GPCs) in Mendelian disease would create new opportunities for improving clinical management and understanding …
    abstract: Comprehensively characterizing genotype-phenotype correlations (GPCs) in Mendelian disease would create new opportunities for improving clinical management and understanding disease biology. However, heterogeneous approaches to data sharing, reuse, and analysis have hindered progress in the field. We developed Genotype-Phenotype Statistical Evaluation of Associations (GPSEA), a software package that leverages the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) Phenopacket Schema to represent case-level clinical and genetic data about individuals. GPSEA applies an independent filtering strategy to boost statistical power to detect categorical GPCs represented by Human Phenotype Ontology terms. GPSEA additionally enables visualization and analysis of continuous phenotypes, clinical severity scores, and survival data such as age of onset of disease or clinical manifestations. We applied GPSEA to 85 cohorts with 6,179 previously published individuals with variants in one of 81 genes associated with 122 Mendelian diseases and identified 253 significant GPCs, with 48 cohorts having at least one statistically significant GPC. These results highlight the power of standardized representations of clinical data for scalable discovery of GPCs in Mendelian disease.

[4] 620988 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620988
    snippet: ... Calame et al. (2023) occurred de novo ... (2023) found that mutant G414R and R1052Q dhx9 proteins exhibited complete nuclear localization ...

[5] Daniel G. Calame
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/author/57215932210/daniel-g-calame
    snippet: ... DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease ... and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD.

[6] GA4GH phenopacket-driven characterization of genotype- ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.12.001/attachment/451f19ad-6686-4c0f-81d6-f7c51c49f20d/mmc3.pdf https://www.cell.com/cms/10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.12.001/attachment/451f19ad-6686-4c0f-81d6-f7c51c49f20d/mmc3.pdf
    snippet: Calame, D.G., Guo, T., Wang, C., Garrett, L ... ing the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelop- ... Nucle Nuclear localization signal. SET SET.

[7] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ... - PubMed
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37467750/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — Dhx9-/- mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[8] Pathogenic variation in R-loop helicase gene DHX9 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mdaconference.org/abstract-library/pathogenic-variation-in-r-loop-helicase-gene-dhx9-causes-axonal-neuropathy-and-neurodevelopmental-disorders/
    snippet: The gene DHX9 exhibits the highest mutational constraint to loss-of-function (LoF) and missense variation of all DDX-DHX helicases; it is also robustly ...

[9] Deep phenotyping and natural history of DHX9-related ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://ern-ithaca.eu/our-research-activities/calls-for-collaboration/deep-phenotyping-and-natural-history-of-dhx9-related-disorder/
    snippet: In 2023 we identified de novo missense and loss-of-function variants in the RNA helicase gene DHX9 in 14 individuals with highly variable neurodevelopmental ...

[10] DHX9 - New Candidate Gene for Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.infrafrontier.eu/news/dhx9-new-candidate-gene-for-neurodevelopmental-disorders-and-charcot-marie-tooth-disease/
    snippet: The researchers discovered that the patients had mutations of the gene DHX9, which disrupted the gene's normal function. This is the first time ...
    abstract: Recurrent high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) and endometrial cancer remain major clinical challenges with limited effective treatment options. DExH-box helicase 9 (DHX9), a DNA/RNA helicase essential for genomic stability, has not yet been explored as a therapeutic target in gynecologic cancers. In this study, we show that a selective DHX9 inhibitor (DHX9i) suppresses proliferation in a subset of HGSOC and endometrial cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, chromosomal instability, and mitotic failure. This effect was independent of microsatellite instability status and prior resistance to platinum or PARP inhibitors. Genomic analysis indicated that DHX9i resistance was unlikely to be driven by single-gene mutations but was instead associated with copy-number alterations in mitotic spindle and microtubule-regulating genes in both HGSOC and endometrial cancer. Transcriptomic profiling further revealed consistent alterations in microtubule- and spindle-associated pathways in DHX9i-resistant models following DHX9i treatment. Mechanistically, DHX9i induced mitotic defects in DHX9i-sensitive models, whereas resistant lines maintained mitotic integrity. Given the convergence of resistance-associated features on microtubule-related pathways, we combined DHX9i with the microtubule-stabilizing agent paclitaxel to enhance mitotic stress. This combination triggered mitotic disruption and enhanced cytotoxicity in DHX9i-resistant cells. In vivo, the combination led to sustained tumor regression and prolonged survival in both DHX9i-sensitive and DHX9i-resistant models without notable toxicity. Overall, our findings define genomic, transcriptomic, and phenotypic characteristics associated with differential responses to DHX9i and support the clinical evaluation of the DHX9i-paclitaxel combination as a therapeutic strategy in recurrent gynecologic cancers.