SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Placental iron utilisation in fetal growth restriction: alterations in mitochondrial haem synthesis and iron–sulphur cluster assembly pathways
    VB Botha, HC Murray, S Acharya… (2026)
    PMID:41697720 DOI:10.1113/JP289451 https://physoc.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1113/JP289451
    snippet: … In addition, key [2Fe-2S] proteins ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) and ferredoxin 2 (FDX2), … cluster assembly to multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome. Nucleic Acids Research, 51(…
    abstract: Fetal growth restriction (FGR) affects ∼10% of pregnancies worldwide and is often associated with placental insufficiency. Iron is essential for maternal haematopoietic adaptations and placental processes such as mitochondrial iron-sulphur (Fe-S) cluster assembly, haem synthesis and erythropoiesis. This study aimed to characterise iron transport and downstream utilisation in FGR. Placental tissues from term uncomplicated (n = 19) and FGR (n = 18) pregnancies were analysed. Maternal iron status was retrospectively assessed from clinical records. Placental mRNA and protein expression of iron-dependent pathways were analysed via RT-qPCR, LC-MS and western blotting. Placental iron content was assessed histologically, and haem levels were measured by an activity assay. FGR pregnancies showed significantly elevated maternal serum ferritin and lower red cell distribution width, although these remained within normal clinical values. Placental iron uptake transporters TFRC and DMT1 were significantly upregulated, while the iron exporter to the fetus, ferroportin, was reduced, indicating increased iron retention in the FGR placenta. Despite altered transporter expression, Fe<sup>3</sup> <sup>+</sup> iron levels were unchanged, suggesting iron utilisation over storage. Subsequent investigations identified reduced mitochondrial Fe-S synthesis components (FDXR, FDX2, NDUFAB1, HSPA9), and a prioritisation of mitochondrial and cytosolic haem synthesis enzymes in FGR. Protein levels of haemoglobin subunits (HBG1, HBG2, HBB, HBA1) and erythrocyte membrane markers (EPB41, EPB42, SPTA1, SPTB, ANK1) were decreased. These findings reveal a compensatory response in FGR placentae, with increased iron uptake and utilisation favouring haem synthesis over Fe-S cluster formation, possibly to support oxygen handling under poor placental vascularisation and reduced fetal oxygenation, with potential consequences for mitochondrial energy metabolism. KEY POINTS: Iron plays a critical role in placental function, and while iron-dependent pathway components are well-characterised, their integrated response and adaptive reprogramming in fetal growth restriction (FGR) remain poorly understood. In FGR, maternal iron status was unchanged, however, placental iron uptake proteins were increased and ferroportin reduced, suggesting that the placenta retains iron. FGR placentae showed altered de novo mitochondrial iron-sulphur cluster (Fe-S) formation and a bottleneck in late-stage Fe-S cluster asse

[2] Mammalian mitochondrial iron–sulfur cluster biogenesis and transfer and related human diseases
    W Zhang, L Xu, H Zhao, K Li (2021)
    PMID:37288145 DOI:10.52601/bpr.2021.200038 PMC10235907 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10235907/
    snippet: As a cofactor, iron–sulfur (Fe–S) cluster binds to proteins or enzymes that play important roles in various important biological processes, including DNA synthesis and repair, …
    abstract: As a cofactor, iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster binds to proteins or enzymes that play important roles in various important biological processes, including DNA synthesis and repair, mitochondrial function, gene transcription and translation. In mammals, the core components involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis are considered to include the scaffold protein ISCU, cysteine desulfurase NFS1 and its accessory proteins ISD11 and ACP, and frataxin (FXN). Proteins involved in Fe-S cluster transfer have been found to include HSC20/HSPA9, as chaperone system, and Fe-S cluster carriers. The biosynthesis and transfer of Fe-S clusters to Fe-S recipients require fine-tune regulation. Recently, significant progress has been made in the structure and mechanism of mitochondrial Fe-S biosynthesis and transfer. Based on, especially, the development of DNA sequencing technology, bioinformatics, and gene editing technology, diseases caused by mutations of Fe-S cluster-related genes have been revealed in recent years, promoting the rapid development in the field of Fe-S and human health. This review focuses on the function of genes involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis and transfer and on the diseases caused by the mutations of the related genes. Finally, some questions we are facing are raised, new hypotheses presented, and the perspectives discussed.

[3] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis from molecular understanding to clinical disease
    M Alfadhel, M Nashabat, QA Ali, K Hundallah (2017)
    PMID:28064324 DOI:10.17712/nsj.2017.1.20160542 https://nsj.org.sa/content/22/1/4.short
    snippet: … , FDX2)14 and Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR)15 which are necessary for … mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 due to NFU1 gene defect, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome …
    abstract: Iron_sulfur clusters (ISCs) are known to play a major role in various protein functions. Located in the mitochondria, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus, they contribute to various core cellular functions. Until recently, only a few human diseases related to mitochondrial ISC biogenesis defects have been described. Such diseases include Friedreich ataxia, combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 19, infantile complex II/III deficiency defect, hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis and mitochondrial muscle myopathy, lipoic acid biosynthesis defects, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia due to glutaredoxin 5 gene defect. Disorders of mitochondrial import, export and translation, including sideroblastic anemia with ataxia, EVEN-PLUS syndrome and mitochondrial complex I deficiency due to nucleotide-binding protein-like protein gene defect, have also been implicated in ISC biogenesis defects. With advances in next generation sequencing technologies, more disorders related to ISC biogenesis defects are expected to be elucidated. In this article, we aim to shed the light on mitochondrial ISC biogenesis, related proteins and their function, pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes of related disorders, diagnostic approach, and future implications.

[4] Outlining the complex pathway of mammalian Fe-S cluster biogenesis
    N Maio, TA Rouault (2020)
    PMID:32311335 DOI:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.02.001 https://www.cell.com/trends/biochemical-sciences/abstract/S0968-0004(20)30034-7
    snippet: … FDXR … Ferredoxin reductase that serves as first electron transfer protein that donates reducing … , and electron donation (mediated by FDX/FDXR), followed by binding of the chaperone/…
    abstract: Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters (ISCs) are ubiquitous cofactors essential to numerous fundamental cellular processes. Assembly of ISCs and their insertion into apoproteins involves the function of complex cellular machineries that operate in parallel in the mitochondrial and cytosolic/nuclear compartments of mammalian cells. The spectrum of diseases caused by inherited defects in genes that encode the Fe-S assembly proteins has recently expanded to include multiple rare human diseases, which manifest distinctive combinations and severities of global and tissue-specific impairments. In this review, we provide an overview of our understanding of ISC biogenesis in mammalian cells, discuss recent work that has shed light on the molecular interactions that govern ISC assembly, and focus on human diseases caused by failures of the biogenesis pathway.

[5] Defects in the maturation of mitochondrial iron–sulfur proteins: Biophysical investigation of the MMDS3 causing Gly104Cys variant of IBA57
    B Bargagna, T Staderini, SH Lang, L Banci… (2024)
    PMID:39408793 DOI:10.3390/ijms251910466 https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/25/19/10466
    snippet: … Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome type 3 (MMDS3) is a rare autosomal … are provided by the mitochondrial ferredoxin (FDX2)/ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) system [17,18,19]. …
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome type 3 (MMDS3) is a rare autosomal recessive mitochondrial leukoencephalopathy caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the <i>IBA57</i> gene. The gene protein product, IBA57, has an unknown role in iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biogenesis but is required for the maturation of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] proteins. To better understand the role of IBA57 in MMDS3, we have investigated the impact of the pathogenic p.Gly104Cys (c.310G > T) variant on the structural and functional properties of IBA57. The Gly104Cys variant has been associated with a severe MMDS3 phenotype in both compound heterozygous and homozygous states, and defects in the activity of mitochondrial respiratory complexes and lipoic acid-dependent enzymes have been demonstrated in the affected patients. Size exclusion chromatography, also coupled to multiple angle light scattering, NMR, circular dichroism, and fluorescence spectroscopy characterization has shown that the Gly104Cys variant does not impair the conversion of the homo-dimeric [2Fe-2S]-ISCA2<sub>2</sub> complex into the hetero-dimeric IBA57-[2Fe-2S]-ISCA2 but significantly affects the stability of IBA57, in both its isolated form and in complex with ISCA2, thus providing a rationale for the severe MMDS3 phenotype associated with this variant.

[6] 620887 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620887
    snippet: ... FDXR gene (103270), which encodes ferredoxin reductase, on chromosome 17q25. ... mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome and mutation in the FDXR ...

[7] Ferroptosis is a novel pathogenic mechanism of FDXR ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41436440 DOI:10.1038/s41420-025-02840-y https://www.nature.com/articles/s41420-025-02840-y
    snippet: by T Campbell · 2025 · Cited by 4 — The iron-related gene FDXR encodes ferredoxin reductase (FDXR), a flavoprotein localized to the IMM. ... mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome ...
    abstract: Loss-of-function variants in the ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) gene result in a primary mitochondrial disease in humans, involving abnormal mitochondrial iron accumulation. However, the molecular mechanism is not fully understood. To better understand the underlying pathology of FDXR-related disease, we generated a mouse model corresponding to the hotspot variant found in humans. We demonstrated increased lipid peroxidation in the inner mitochondrial and plasma membranes, resulting in susceptibility to ferroptosis. Closer examination revealed that disruption of the NRF2 pathway and its target gene SLC7A11 appear to play important roles in this pathogenic process. Finally, administration of the NRF2 activator omaveloxolone, which was recently approved by the FDA for treatment of Friedreich's ataxia, helps mitigate the pathogenesis. Together, our results suggest that ferroptosis is a novel underlying mechanism of FDXR-related disease and that activation of NRF2 could be an immediate, viable treatment option for individuals with FDXR-related disease and other conditions involving aberrant iron metabolism.

[8] FDXR
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/genes/FDXR
    snippet: ferredoxin reductase. OMIM: 103270, Gene2Phenotype. 10 panels. Panel ... Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 9B, OMIM:620887. Green FDXR in ...

[9] FDXR gene Ferredoxin Reductase
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/FDXR
    snippet: Diseases associated with FDXR include Auditory Neuropathy And Optic Atrophy and Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 9B. Among its related pathways ...

[10] FDXR | Homo sapiens gene
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.alliancegenome.org/gene/HGNC:3642
    snippet: RGD:7240710 · FDXR Annotation details, is implicated in, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 9B. IAGP. OMIM via RGD · RGD automated PIPELINES () ():.