SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder and are associated with impaired mRNA processing
    A Fliedner, P Kirchner, A Wiesener… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30228-7
    snippet: … implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In … Speech was more severely affected than motor development… developmental delay and intellectual disability and frequently …
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[2] Further delineation of the SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder
    …, F Tran Mau (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01760-2
    snippet: … disorder (NDD) (Fliedner-Zweier syndrome, MIM#620511) [8,… phenotypes, including mild intellectual disability, seizures, and … range, and language and speech delay. Mild manifestation …
    abstract: While mostly de novo truncating variants in SCAF4 were recently identified in 18 individuals with variable neurodevelopmental phenotypes, knowledge on the molecular and clinical spectrum is still limited. We assembled data on 50 novel individuals with SCAF4 variants ascertained via GeneMatcher and personal communication. With detailed evaluation of clinical data, in silico predictions and structural modeling, we further characterized the molecular and clinical spectrum of the autosomal dominant SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder. The molecular spectrum comprises 25 truncating, eight splice-site and five missense variants. While all other truncating variants were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, significance of one C-terminal truncating variant, one splice-site variant and the missense variants remained unclear. Three missense variants in the CTD-interacting domain of SCAF4 were predicted to destabilize the domain. Twenty-three variants occurred de novo, and variants were inherited in 13 cases. Frequent clinical findings were mild developmental delay with speech impairment, seizures, and skeletal abnormalities such as clubfoot, scoliosis or hip dysplasia. Cognitive abilities ranged from normal IQ to severe intellectual disability (ID), with borderline to mild ID in the majority of individuals. Our study confirms the role of SCAF4 variants in neurodevelopmental disorders and further delineates the associated clinical phenotype.

[3] Rolle des Transkriptionsregulators PHF6 und des Transkriptionsterminators SCAF4 bei Entwicklungsstörungen
    A Fliedner
    https://open.fau.de/bitstreams/f40a0227-9d48-4595-93f1-bfef2148013e/download
    snippet: … Diese umfassten sieben trunkierende und zwei Spleiß-Varianten, von denen acht de novo … prominent phenotypic features included mild intellectual disability, severely delayed speech …

[4] Roles of Transcriptional Regulator PHF6 and Transcriptional Terminator SCAF4 in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    A Fliedner (2021)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/551ce428590f754704e579472ecaea1a/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2026366&diss=y
    snippet: … Diese umfassten sieben trunkierende und zwei Spleiß-Varianten, von denen acht de novo … prominent phenotypic features included mild intellectual disability, severely delayed speech …

[5] SCAF4‐related syndromic intellectual disability
    LML Carvalho, CF Pinto… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63032 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63032
    snippet: … (ID) was established in 2020 by Fliedner et al. Since then, no … contributes to defining the phenotypic spectrum of this … years due to presentation of microcephaly and speech delay. …
    abstract: The causal link between variants in the SCAF4 gene and a syndromic form of intellectual disability (ID) was established in 2020 by Fliedner et al. Since then, no additional cases have been reported. We performed exome sequencing in a 16-year-old Brazilian male presenting with ID, epilepsy, behavioral problems, speech impairment, facial dysmorphisms, heart malformations, and obesity. A de novo pathogenic variant [SCAF4(NM_020706.2):c.374_375dup(p.Glu126LeufsTer20)] was identified. This is the second study reporting the involvement of SCAF4 in syndromic ID, and the description of the patient's clinical features contributes to defining the phenotypic spectrum of this recently described Mendelian disorder.

[6] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929720302287
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — The remaining eight individuals all had developmental delay and intellectual disability, mostly in the mild range. Speech was more severely ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[7] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/pdf/S0002-9297(20)30228-7.pdf
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — The re- maining eight individuals all had developmental delay and intellectual disability, mostly in the mild range. Speech was more severely ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[8] Entry - *616023 - SR-RELATED C-TERMINAL DOMAIN ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/616023
    snippet: She had moderate intellectual disability (IQ of 56), developmental regression, speech ... SCAF4-related syndromic intellectual disability. Am. J. Med. Genet. 191A ...

[9] A novel nonsense mutation in SCAF4 associated with fliedner-zweier syndrome: a case report and review of the literature
    Z Chen, J Zhao, X Fan, X Xuan, X Zhao (2025)
    DOI:10.3389/fgene.2025.1487352/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/genetics/articles/10.3389/fgene.2025.1487352/full
    snippet: … month-old Chinese boy displaying intellectual impairment, language development disorder, behavioral … We reviewed the clinical phenotype of the affected patient and investigated gene …

[10] A novel nonsense mutation in SCAF4 associated with fliedner ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12021868 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12021868/
    snippet: We present the case of a 4-year and seven-month-old Chinese boy displaying intellectual impairment, language development disorder, behavioral ...
    abstract: <h4>Introduction</h4>Variants in the SR-related C-terminal domain-Associated factor 4 (SCAF4) gene are linked to Fliedner-Zweier syndrome (FZS), which presents with diverse symptoms, including mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. However, there is a paucity of cases describing genotypes and clinical features.<h4>Case presentation</h4>We present the case of a 4-year and seven-month-old Chinese boy displaying intellectual impairment, language development disorder, behavioral abnormalities, and distinct facial features. Whole exome sequencing (WES) identified a heterozygous nonsense mutation, c.1693C>T (p.Arg565*), located in exon 14 of the SCAF4 gene (NM_020706). Sanger sequencing confirmed paternal inheritance of this mutation. RNA sequencing from the patient demonstrated widespread transcriptional dysregulation, reinforcing the role of SCAF4 dysfunction in impaired transcription and neurodevelopmental disorders. This mutation is novel, not previously recorded in databases such as GnomAD or dbSNP, nor reported in existing literature.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We reviewed the clinical features of the patients reported in the literature with mutations in SCAF4 gene and described the case of a Chinese patient with this mutation. This case underscores the critical need for continued exploration of genotype-phenotype correlations, enhancing our understanding of the diverse manifestations of Fliedner-Zweier syndrome and informing future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.