SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … Together with the concurrent reports by Schnabel et al. and Al-Kasbi et al., 3 10 affected … We provide an update on Family A from Roos et al. which includes description of the FILIP1-…

[2] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … Our work provides evidence to support the existence of FILIP1-related arthrogryposis with microcephaly, TFCP2L1-related renal tubulopathy, FAM177A1-related motor dysfunction and …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[3] The 2025 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2025)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(24)01757-7/abstract
    snippet: This table used to be published annually in the December issue since 2010, but is now published in the January issue. Its purpose is to provide the reader of Neuromuscular Disorders …

[4] The 2026 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2026)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(25)01030-2/abstract
    snippet: This table used to be published annually in the December issue since 2010, but is now published in the January issue. Its purpose is to provide the reader of Neuromuscular Disorders …

[5] Deletion of filamin A-interacting protein (FILIP) results in a weak grip strength and abnormal responses to nociceptive stimulation
    H Yagi, K Takao, S Hattori, Y Minato… (2025)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304394025000461
    snippet: … Filamin A-interacting protein (FILIP in mice, FILIP1 in humans) was first identified as a protein that … Recent research has reported that FILIP1 mutations lead to severe neurological and …
    abstract: Filamin A-interacting protein (FILIP in mice, FILIP1 in humans) was first identified as a protein that negatively controls neuronal migration in rodents, and was subsequently demonstrated to be pivotal for the development of the neocortex. In the previous study, we generated FILIP knockout mice to investigate the in vivo functions of FILIP in cortical development. Since FILIP mRNA is widely expressed in the body, we systematically examined FILIP-knockout mice to determine the functions of FILIP throughout the body. Our results showed that FILIP-knockout mice exhibited weak grip strength and sensory abnormalities. Interestingly, we also found that FILIP was expressed in a subset of neurons in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG). Recent research has reported that FILIP1 mutations lead to severe neurological and musculoskeletal abnormalities, resulting in the proposal of a new disease entity, termed FILIP1opathy. It is expected that our FILIP-knockout mice could be used as a model for the pathological investigation of FILIP1opathy.

[6] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: by LM Watts · 2024 · Cited by 2 — , et al. Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly . Hum ...

[7] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://europepmc.org/article/pmc/10060356
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Schnabel ... Roos ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[8] FILIP1 - Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 - Homo sapiens (Human)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q7Z7B0/publications
    snippet: Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Schnabel F., Schuler E., Al ...
    abstract: This study investigated the association between temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis and specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms. We also explored the potential functional impacts of these polymorphisms using in silico methods. 354 patients with temporomandibular disorders were classified into osteoarthritis and without osteoarthritis according to the presence of degenerative bone changes in the magnetic resonance imaging including osteophytes, erosion, subchondral cysts, and atrophy. Genomic DNA was extracted and genotyping was performed to determine 16 alleles. Multivariate analysis was performed to explore the polymorphisms associated with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis, followed by in silico analysis to predict the functional relevance of the polymorphisms. Multivariate analysis identified that rs9350591 (between FILIP1 and SENP6) and rs8044769 (FTO) are potentially associated with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis. In silico analyses revealed that rs9350591 affects transcription factor binding, whereas rs8044769 alters the predicted score as a splicing site. These findings suggest that genetic factors, particularly rs9350591 and rs8044769, are associated with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis among patients with temporomandibular disorders. This underscores the importance of genetic studies for understanding temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis. This study provides the potential genetic clues for temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis and insights into the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying this disease.

[9] 607307 - FILAMIN A-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; FILIP1
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/607307
    snippet: ... Schnabel et al., 2023). ... Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly.

[10] FILIP1 gene Filamin A Interacting Protein 1
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/FILIP1
    snippet: Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Human genetics Schnabel F …