SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genome sequencing reveals high diagnostic yield in children with severe sporadic developmental language disorder
    MGP Kennis, L van Haaften, K van Hulst… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02214-7
    snippet: … In individual 6, we found a likely pathogenic de novo missense … intellectual disability. The study is marked by a prospective design and a carefully selected cohort with deep phenotypic …
    abstract: A developmental language disorder (DLD) is a neurobiological condition characterized by impaired language development despite adequate linguistic input and normal intelligence. The role of monogenic causes in the pathogenesis of DLD is largely unknown and diagnostic genetic testing is rarely offered. This study assessed the diagnostic yield of genome sequencing in severe DLD and investigated the underlying genetic foundations. We designed a prospective cohort study involving trio-based genome sequencing in 25 individuals (aged 3-25 years) with severe DLD, no intellectual disability (non-verbal IQ ≥ 70), no autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and no first-degree family history of DLD or neurodevelopmental disorders. (Likely) pathogenic variants were found in nine of 25 individuals, reflecting a molecular diagnostic yield of 36%. The genetic causes were diverse and involved seven autosomal dominant disorders, one autosomal recessive disorder, and one sex chromosome aneuploidy. In seven individuals, the disease-causing variant occurred de novo. All identified (likely) pathogenic variants were located in genes or loci that have been previously implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders with variable clinical presentations. Importantly, the genetic diagnosis provided actionable insights for counselling and clinical follow-up for all nine individuals. This study reveals a high prevalence of rare (mainly de novo) genetic variants in individuals with severe and sporadic DLD, and demonstrates extensive molecular overlap with other neurodevelopmental disorders. Our results support the implementation of routine trio-based genetic testing in individuals with severe and sporadic DLD.

[2] X-exome sequencing of 405 unresolved families identifies seven novel intellectual disability genes
    H Hu, SA Haas, J Chelly, H Van Esch, M Raynaud… (2016)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/mp2014193
    snippet: … likely causative protein truncating and missense variants in 7 … truncating variant associated with a profound phenotype in … ATN1 (known ID protein) interacts with TAF4 and negatively …
    abstract: X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder. During the past two decades in excess of 100 X-chromosome ID genes have been identified. Yet, a large number of families mapping to the X-chromosome remained unresolved suggesting that more XLID genes or loci are yet to be identified. Here, we have investigated 405 unresolved families with XLID. We employed massively parallel sequencing of all X-chromosome exons in the index males. The majority of these males were previously tested negative for copy number variations and for mutations in a subset of known XLID genes by Sanger sequencing. In total, 745 X-chromosomal genes were screened. After stringent filtering, a total of 1297 non-recurrent exonic variants remained for prioritization. Co-segregation analysis of potential clinically relevant changes revealed that 80 families (20%) carried pathogenic variants in established XLID genes. In 19 families, we detected likely causative protein truncating and missense variants in 7 novel and validated XLID genes (CLCN4, CNKSR2, FRMPD4, KLHL15, LAS1L, RLIM and USP27X) and potentially deleterious variants in 2 novel candidate XLID genes (CDK16 and TAF1). We show that the CLCN4 and CNKSR2 variants impair protein functions as indicated by electrophysiological studies and altered differentiation of cultured primary neurons from Clcn4(-/-) mice or after mRNA knock-down. The newly identified and candidate XLID proteins belong to pathways and networks with established roles in cognitive function and intellectual disability in particular. We suggest that systematic sequencing of all X-chromosomal genes in a cohort of patients with genetic evidence for X-chromosome locus involvement may resolve up to 58% of Fragile X-negative cases.

[3] Identifying rare genetic variants in 21 highly multiplex autism families: the role of diagnosis and autistic traits
    RP More, V Warrier, H Brunel, C Buckingham… (2023)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-022-01938-4
    snippet: … of inherited protein-truncating and missense variation in … linking them to autism, intellectual disability, or co-occurring … Finally, we did not have further phenotypic information such as …
    abstract: Autism is a highly heritable, heterogeneous, neurodevelopmental condition. Large-scale genetic studies, predominantly focussing on simplex families and clinical diagnoses of autism have identified hundreds of genes associated with autism. Yet, the contribution of these classes of genes to multiplex families and autistic traits still warrants investigation. Here, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of 21 highly multiplex autism families, with at least three autistic individuals in each family, to prioritise genes associated with autism. Using a combination of both autistic traits and clinical diagnosis of autism, we identify rare variants in genes associated with autism, and related neurodevelopmental conditions in multiple families. We identify a modest excess of these variants in autistic individuals compared to individuals without an autism diagnosis. Finally, we identify a convergence of the genes identified in molecular pathways related to development and neurogenesis. In sum, our analysis provides initial evidence to demonstrate the value of integrating autism diagnosis and autistic traits to prioritise genes.

[4] Transcription pause and escape in neurodevelopmental disorders
    KN Eigenhuis, HB Somsen… (2022)
    DOI:10.3389/fnins.2022.846272/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2022.846272/full
    snippet: … phenotype (intellectual disability, short stature and craniofacial dysmorphism) were identified that carried missense … two truncating non-sense variants and 6 different missense variants, …

[5] Genomic landscape of rare variants in a Chinese autism cohort and discovery of novel risk genes
    S Tan, Y Lyu, X Sun, R Guo, X Zhang, Z Song… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-026-03754-6
    snippet: … Genotype-to-Phenotype … ’ tag from Gene Curation Expert Panel of intellectual disability (ID) and autism, … by genes with high missense intolerance reflected by the missense Z-score, …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a genetically complex neurodevelopmental condition with a high heritability. However, genomic studies of ASD have been underrepresented in East Asian populations, and the molecular yield in ASD cohorts remains modest. Here, we present a whole-genome sequencing analysis of 3109 samples across 1033 Chinese ASD families. By examining a wide spectrum of genetic variation, we identified rare ASD-associated variants in 19.2% of affected individuals, providing a population-specific view of the genetic architecture of ASD. We identify significant enrichment of de novo variants in probands, nominate or strengthen candidate risk genes (e.g., NCL, SPPL3, ADGRB1, SLC9A3, KIF1B) through mutational burden, evolutionary constraint, recurrent missense site, and functional assays, and implicate convergent pathways including protein palmitoylation. By integrating over 40,000 ASD cases across unpublished and published global cohorts, we identify 245 ASD risk genes, including 45 with limited prior evidence and 32 with no prior association. Single-cell transcriptomic profiling of the developing human cortex reveals that ASD risk genes exhibit widespread yet heterogeneous expression across all major cell types, with peak expression in excitatory neurons, particularly intratelencephalic neurons, and enriched expression in microglia (e.g., C1QC, CARD11, SNX13, MEF2C, FOXP2, TCF12, MED13L), suggesting convergent involvement of both synaptic and neuroimmune mechanisms. Together, our findings expand the ASD genetic landscape and suggest convergent pathogenic axes involving transcriptional regulation, synaptic signaling and plasticity, and neuroimmune interactions. This work supports the development of inclusive diagnostic strategies and provides a foundation for mechanistic and intervention exploration in ASD.

[6] Truncating mutations in TAF4B and ZMYND15 causing recessive azoospermia
    Ö Ayhan, M Balkan, A Guven, R Hazan… (2014)
    PMID:24431330 DOI:10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-102102 https://jmg.bmj.com/content/51/4/239.short
    snippet: … we identified truncating mutations in two different genes with … (missense, truncating and splicing variants) were considered … medical records showed a similar clinical phenotype in all. …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Azoospermia is the absence of a measurable level of spermatozoa in the semen. It affects approximately 1% of all men, and the genetic basis of the majority of idiopathic cases is unknown. We investigated two unrelated consanguineous families with idiopathic azoospermia. In family 1, there were three azoospermic brothers and one oligozoospermic brother; and in family 2, there were three azoospermic brothers. Testis biopsy in the brothers in family 2 had led to the diagnosis of maturation arrest in the spermatid stage.<h4>Methods</h4>Candidate disease loci were found via linkage mapping using data from single nucleotide polymorphism genome scans. Exome sequencing was applied to find the variants at the loci.<h4>Results</h4>We identified two candidate loci in each family and homozygous truncating mutations p.R611X in TAF4B in family 1 and p.K507Sfs*3 in ZMYND15 in family 2. We did not detect any mutations in these genes in a cohort of 45 azoospermic and 15 oligozoospermic men. Expression studies for ZMYND15 showed that the highest expression was in the testis.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Both genes are known to have roles in spermatogenesis in mice but neither has been studied in humans. To our knowledge, they are the first genes identified for recessive idiopathic spermatogenic failure in men. Assuming that recessive genes for isolated azoospermia are as numerous in men as in mice, each gene is possibly responsible for only a small fraction of all cases.

[7] De novo putative loss‐of‐function variants in TAF4 are associated with a neuro‐developmental disorder
    BDE Janssen, MJH van den Boogaard… (2022)
    DOI:10.1002/humu.24444 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/humu.24444
    snippet: … ) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent … TAF4 might shift the expression profile of different TAF4 splicing products. Since different alternative splicing variants of TAF4 …
    abstract: TATA-binding protein associated factor 4 (TAF4) is a subunit of the Transcription Factor IID (TFIID) complex, a central player in transcription initiation. Other members of this multimeric complex have been implicated previously as monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. TAF4 has not been described to date as a monogenic disease gene. We here present a cohort of eight individuals, each carrying de novo putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro-developmental disorder (NDD). Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin this novel disorder "TAF4-related NDD" (T4NDD). We place T4NDD in the context of other disorders related to TFIID subunits, revealing shared features of T4NDD with other TAF-opathies.

[8] Recurrent somatic mutations of FAT family cadherins induce an aggressive phenotype and poor prognosis in anaplastic large cell lymphoma
    M Villa, GG Sharma, F Malighetti, M Mauri… (2024)
    PMID:39478125 DOI:10.1038/s41416-024-02881-7 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41416-024-02881-7
    snippet: … cohort revealed markedly different FAT4 expression intensities: … Notably, the CCLE database reports missense variants in two … A TAF4-homology domain from the corepressor ETO is a …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) is a rare and aggressive T-cell lymphoma, classified into ALK-positive and ALK-negative subtypes, based on the presence of chromosomal translocations involving the ALK gene. The current standard of treatment for ALCL is polychemotherapy, with a high overall survival rate. However, a subset of patients does not respond to or develops resistance to these therapies, posing a serious challenge for clinicians. Recent targeted treatments such as ALK kinase inhibitors and anti-CD30 antibody-drug conjugates have shown promise but, for a fraction of patients, the prognosis is still unsatisfactory.<h4>Methods</h4>We investigated the genetic landscape of ALK + ALCL by whole-exome sequencing; recurring mutations were characterized in vitro and in vivo using transduced ALCL cellular models.<h4>Results</h4>Recurrent mutations in FAT family genes and the transcription factor RUNX1T1 were found. These mutations induced changes in ALCL cells morphology, growth, and migration, shedding light on potential factors contributing to treatment resistance. In particular, FAT4 silencing in ALCL cells activated the β-catenin and YAP1 pathways, which play crucial roles in tumor growth, and conferred resistance to chemotherapy. Furthermore, STAT1 and STAT3 were hyper-activated in these cells. Gene expression profiling showed global changes in pathways related to cell adhesion, cytoskeletal organization, and oncogenic signaling. Notably, FAT mutations associated with poor outcome in patients.<h4>Conclusions</h4>These findings provide novel insights into the molecular portrait of ALCL, that could help improve treatment strategies and the prognosis for ALCL patients.

[9] Missense variants in TAF1 and developmental phenotypes
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:31646703 DOI:10.1002/humu.23936 PMC7187541 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7187541/
    snippet: by H Cheng · 2019 · Cited by 36 — Phenotypes associated with TAF1 variants show considerable pleiotropy and clinical variability, but prominent among previously unreported effects were brain ...
    abstract: We recently described a new neurodevelopmental syndrome (TAF1/MRXS33 intellectual disability syndrome) (MIM# 300966) caused by pathogenic variants involving the X-linked gene TAF1, which participates in RNA polymerase II transcription. The initial study reported eleven families, and the syndrome was defined as presenting early in life with hypotonia, facial dysmorphia, and developmental delay that evolved into intellectual disability (ID) and/or autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We have now identified an additional 27 families through a genotype-first approach. Familial segregation analysis, clinical phenotyping, and bioinformatics were capitalized on to assess potential variant pathogenicity, and molecular modelling was performed for those variants falling within structurally characterized domains of TAF1. A novel phenotypic clustering approach was also applied, in which the phenotypes of affected individuals were classified using 51 standardized Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms. Phenotypes associated with TAF1 variants show considerable pleiotropy and clinical variability, but prominent among previously unreported effects were brain morphological abnormalities, seizures, hearing loss, and heart malformations. Our allelic series broadens the phenotypic spectrum of TAF1/MRXS33 intellectual disability syndrome and the range of TAF1 molecular defects in humans. It also illustrates the challenges for determining the pathogenicity of inherited missense variants, particularly for genes mapping to chromosome X. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

[10] A comprehensive framework for the interpretation of TTN ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.07.17.25331109v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.07.17.25331109v1.full-text
    snippet: Clinical interpretation of TTN missense variants is complex, given the large size of the gene, the frequency of the variants, and the default ...