SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … While ocular phenotypes were not assessed in Kdm2b … full-length Kdm2b displayed neural tube defects, retinal coloboma … Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder …
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[2] Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its associated DNA methylation signature
    RH Van Jaarsveld, J Reilly, MC Cornips… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S109836002200942X
    snippet: … We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD. … KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD.<h4>Methods</h4>Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature.<h4>Results</h4>We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.

[3] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series Supporting the CxxC Domain Phenotype With Emphasis on Ocular and Dermatologic Features
    A Gomes, Á Martín‐Rodríguez… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: … The spectrum of congenital anomalies in our individuals includes cardiac septal defects and unilateral renal agenesis. When integrated with published data, these findings suggest that …
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[4] A rigorous in silico genomic interrogation at 1p13.3 reveals 16 autosomal dominant candidate genes in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
    A Ben (2022)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2022.979061/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2022.979061/full
    snippet: … phenotype of four subjects having microdeletions of different sizes at 1p13.3 with an overlapping phenotype of … or their interactors, and a behavioral phenotype was shown in KO mice (…

[5] From flies to mice: the emerging role of non-canonical PRC1 members in mammalian development
    I Bajusz, G Kovács, MK Pirity (2018)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4655/2/1/4
    snippet: … In this review, we summarize the mouse knockout phenotypes … One of the latest studies found that Kdm2b is required for … in individuals with a neurodevelopmental disorder, featuring …

[6] Supplemental material J Med Genet doi: 10.1136/jmg-2025 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://jmg.bmj.com/content/jmedgenet/early/2025/12/03/jmg-2025-111125/DC1/embed/inline-supplementary-material-1.pdf?download=true
    snippet: Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder ... WDR11 is another causative gene for coloboma, cardiac anomaly and growth ...

[7] Identification of DNA Methylation Episignatures for Classification and Phenotype/Genotype Correlation in Mendelian Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    J Reilly (2022)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/4d490a4ccf210a521542a90c7adc68e6/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … the majority of KDM2B variant carriers. Figure 3-S3… CHARGE in 23 patients; 27 patients were ruled out for both signatures, and a final patient had an episignature consistent with Kabuki …

[8] Germline variants in tumor suppressor FBXW7 lead to impaired ubiquitination and a neurodevelopmental syndrome
    SEM Stephenson, G Costain, LER Blok, MA Silk… (2022)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(22)00098-2
    snippet: … abnormalities and mandibular, ocular, and digital features.De … Additionally, changes to charge, volume, and residue nature … features characteristic of Kabuki syndrome and the deeply …
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders are highly heterogenous conditions resulting from abnormalities of brain architecture and/or function. FBXW7 (F-box and WD-repeat-domain-containing 7), a recognized developmental regulator and tumor suppressor, has been shown to regulate cell-cycle progression and cell growth and survival by targeting substrates including CYCLIN E1/2 and NOTCH for degradation via the ubiquitin proteasome system. We used a genotype-first approach and global data-sharing platforms to identify 35 individuals harboring de novo and inherited FBXW7 germline monoallelic chromosomal deletions and nonsense, frameshift, splice-site, and missense variants associated with a neurodevelopmental syndrome. The FBXW7 neurodevelopmental syndrome is distinguished by global developmental delay, borderline to severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, and gastrointestinal issues. Brain imaging detailed variable underlying structural abnormalities affecting the cerebellum, corpus collosum, and white matter. A crystal-structure model of FBXW7 predicted that missense variants were clustered at the substrate-binding surface of the WD40 domain and that these might reduce FBXW7 substrate binding affinity. Expression of recombinant FBXW7 missense variants in cultured cells demonstrated impaired CYCLIN E1 and CYCLIN E2 turnover. Pan-neuronal knockdown of the Drosophila ortholog, archipelago, impaired learning and neuronal function. Collectively, the data presented herein provide compelling evidence of an F-Box protein-related, phenotypically variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with monoallelic variants in FBXW7.

[9] Insights into the genotype–phenotype relationship of ocular manifestations in Kabuki syndrome
    SS Shah, A Fulton, M Jabroun… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63155 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63155
    snippet: … Urinary tract anomalies commonly consisted of anatomical renal … The high frequency of cardiac anomalies in KS1 in our … level between Kabuki, Kleefstra, and CHARGE syndromes may …
    abstract: We aim to assess if genotype-phenotype correlations are present within ocular manifestations of Kabuki syndrome (KS) among a large multicenter cohort. We conducted a retrospective, medical record review including clinical history and comprehensive ophthalmological examinations of a total of 47 individuals with molecularly confirmed KS and ocular manifestations at Boston Children's Hospital and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. We assessed information regarding ocular structural, functional, and adnexal elements as well as pertinent associated phenotypic features associated with KS. For both type 1 KS (KS1) and type 2 KS (KS2), we observed more severe eye pathology in nonsense variants towards the C-terminus of each gene, KMT2D and KDM6A, respectively. Furthermore, frameshift variants appeared to be not associated with structural ocular elements. Between both types of KS, ocular structural elements were more frequently identified in KS1 compared with KS2, which only involved the optic disc in our cohort. These results reinforce the need for a comprehensive ophthalmologic exam upon diagnosis of KS and regular follow-up exams. The specific genotype may allow risk stratification of the severity of the ophthalmologic manifestation. However, additional studies involving larger cohorts are needed to replicate our observations and conduct powered analyses to more formally risk-stratify based on genotype, highlighting the importance of multicenter collaborations in rare disease research.

[10] From genotype to phenotype—a review of Kabuki syndrome
    KK Barry, M Tsaparlis, D Hoffman, D Hartman… (2022)
    PMID:36292647 DOI:10.3390/genes13101761 https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/13/10/1761
    snippet: … of the lateral third of the lower eye lid, long palpebral fissures, … clinical phenotype of KS follows a highly variable and continuous spectrum that additionally includes cardiac, renal…
    abstract: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare neuro-developmental disorder caused by variants in genes of histone modification, including <i>KMT2D</i> and <i>KDM6A</i>. This review assesses our current understanding of KS, which was originally named Niikawa-Kuroki syndrome, and aims to guide surveillance and medical care of affected individuals as well as identify gaps in knowledge and unmet patient needs. Ovid MEDLINE and EMBASE databases were searched from 1981 to 2021 to identify reports related to genotype and systems-based phenotype characterization of KS. A total of 2418 articles were retrieved, and 152 were included in this review, representing a total of 1369 individuals with KS. Genotype, phenotype, and the developmental and behavioral profile of KS are reviewed. There is a continuous clinical phenotype spectrum associated with KS with notable variability between affected individuals and an emerging genotype-phenotype correlation. The observed clinical variability may be attributable to differences in genotypes and/or unknown genetic and epigenetic factors. Clinical management is symptom oriented, fragmented, and lacks established clinical care standards. Additional research should focus on enhancing understanding of the burden of illness, the impact on quality of life, the adult phenotype, life expectancy and development of standard-of-care guidelines.