SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, … girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[2] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … tients, including early respiratory failure and a similar pattern of muscle involvement in MRI, highlighting the impairment of the sartorius and gracilis muscles. Furthermore, the proband's …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[3] Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies
    SDMDPD Limb
    https://www.medlink.com/articles/limb-girdle-muscular-dystrophies
    snippet: … Muscle MRI in patients with the previously termed Bethlem … There is relative sparing of the sartorius, gracillis and adductor … in Miyoshi myopathy or with distal myopathy with anterior …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>This article reviews the current classification system, common subtypes, differential diagnosis, diagnostic algorithms, current management strategies, and evolving therapeutic areas for limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs).<h4>Latest developments</h4>There are currently five dominantly inherited LGMDs (LGMD-D1 to D5) and 29 recessively inherited LGMDs (LGMD-R1 to R29). Progress in molecular genetics makes next-generation sequencing gene panels the initial step in diagnosing LGMD and, in some cases, obviates the need for muscle biopsy. The panel should include LGMD genes and genes responsible for other hereditary myopathies and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing can be performed before or after a muscle biopsy, depending on the specifics of each case. Once a diagnosis of LGMD is established, genetic counseling, symptomatic and supportive care, and cardiopulmonary surveillance remain the cornerstones of management. However, results from preclinical studies and early-stage clinical trials of genetic therapies for common LGMD-R subtypes are promising.<h4>Essential points</h4>Progressive proximal weakness and hyperCKemia are hallmark features of LGMDs; however, they are not specific and can also be observed in many acquired and hereditary myopathies. Muscle biopsy is typically reserved for patients with negative or inconclusive genetic testing and can be particularly useful for verifying the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance. Advances in molecular genetics and genetic therapies have revolutionized the diagnostic landscape of LGMDs and paved the way for future disease-specific treatments.

[4] Current biomarkers in inclusion body myositis
    E Daniel, IC Smith, ML Sampaio… (2024)
    PMID:39967427 DOI:10.1177/22143602241286712 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/22143602241286712
    snippet: … , while magnetic resonance imaging and electromyography … in other muscles such as the sartorius (*) and left adductors (**), (b) … muscular dystrophy and congenital myopathy, and are a …
    abstract: Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is an idiopathic muscle disorder primarily affecting adults above the age of 50. IBM is characterized by weakness in the knee extensor and deep finger flexor muscles due to muscle atrophy and fibroadipose replacement. Dynamometry and manual muscle testing are commonly used to assess patient muscle strength, while magnetic resonance imaging and electromyography studies identify the patterns of muscle atrophy and motor unit potentials. Although the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of IBM are still unknown, common histopathological markers include rimmed vacuoles and inclusions. The immune system is also largely implicated in pathogenesis, as skeletal muscle in IBM overexpresses major histocompatibility complex I (MHC-I), and cluster of differentiation (CD) 8+ T-cells, and features endomysial inflammation. Antibodies to the cytosolic 5'-nucleotidase 1A (cN1A) protein have been associated with IBM but have low sensitivity and specificity. As many classic features of IBM present only in advanced stages of disease, there are substantial challenges to the diagnosis and monitoring of IBM progression in its early stages. Identifying early diagnostic biomarkers and new biomarker signatures associated with IBM disease progression is necessary for clinical trial readiness.

[5] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38366623/
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features ... MRI showed predominant impairment of ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[6] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Here we report five affected individuals from two unrelated families who carry a biallelic missense variant in SNUPN and display a muscular dystrophy phenotype.
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[7] (PDF) SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/396259358_SNUPN-Related_Muscular_Dystrophy_Novel_Phenotypic_Pathological_and_Functional_Protein_Insights
    snippet: Here we report the first family with SNUPN‐related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult‐onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings. Methods ...

[8] SNUPN-Related Muscular Dystrophy: novel phenotypic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://deustoteka.deusto.es/items/041708db-7e8d-4a4e-bbaa-c573b102a5f5/full
    snippet: Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings. Methods: ...
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[9] Muscle Imaging in Inclusion Body Myositis: Refinement of MRI Criteria and Insights Into Upper Body Involvement
    E Torchia, M Lucchini, J Verdu‐Diaz… (2026)
    PMID:41549703 DOI:10.1002/jcsm.70173 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jcsm.70173
    snippet: … Methods: Sixty- eight MRI scans and clinical records from patients diagnosed with IBM … MRI criteria based on muscle imaging features and assessed their sensitivity. Whole body muscle …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>The diagnosis of inclusion body myositis (IBM) can be delayed because of its heterogeneous clinical presentation and the lack of specific biomarkers. Muscle imaging has gained increasing relevance over the past decade and is now included among the supportive criteria in the international diagnostic guidelines. This study aimed to refine MRI criteria for IBM to facilitate clearer pattern recognition, increase their reproducibility and broader clinical applicability. We also aimed to provide a comprehensive evaluation of muscle wasting across the entire body, including less frequently assessed regions such as the neck, scapular girdle and trunk muscles, and to explore the presence of radiological IBM phenotypes through cluster analysis.<h4>Methods</h4>Sixty-eight MRI scans and clinical records from patients diagnosed with IBM between 2003 and 2024 (60% males; mean age: 66 years, range: 46-85) were retrospectively reviewed. We defined a new set of three main and three supportive MRI criteria based on muscle imaging features and assessed their sensitivity. Whole body muscle involvement was semi-quantitatively scored using standardized scales across 6006 muscles. Pairwise correlation and K-means cluster analysis were performed to evaluate clinical-radiological relationships and identify phenotypic subgroups.<h4>Results</h4>The revised MRI criteria achieved 96% sensitivity. Performance was consistent across clinical subgroups and remained robust (83%) in patients with atypical onset. Whole-body analysis highlighted mild but frequent wasting of paraspinal (90% of scans) and neck and scapular girdle muscles (87%), while intracranial muscles were consistently unaffected. Correlation analysis underlined a significant association between radiological and functional involvement in the lower (r = 0.57, p < 0.001) but not in the upper body. Cluster analysis revealed two overlapping but distinguishable imaging phenotypes, characterized by different involvement of paraspinal and distal leg muscles. Cluster 1 showed a higher proportion of male patients.<h4>Conclusions</h4>The revised MRI criteria allow a reliable and easy recognition of the IBM pattern of muscle involvement, while whole-body imaging offers additional insights into disease heterogeneity and supports patient stratification in clinical trials. Clustering results also highlighted a possible sex-related influence on muscle vulnerability. The observed clinico-radiological correlations further 

[10] Whole-body MRI and pathological findings in adult patients with myopathies
    X Tomas, JC Milisenda, AI Garcia (2019)
    PMID:30377729 DOI:10.1007/s00256-018-3107-1 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00256-018-3107-1
    snippet: … showing MRI signs suggestive of Becker muscular dystrophy. … between inclusion body myositis and polymyositis. J … Whole-body muscle MRI in 20 patients suffering from late onset …
    abstract: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is considered the most sensitive and specific imaging technique for the detection of muscle diseases related to myopathies. Since 2008, the use of whole-body MRI (WBMRI) to evaluate myopathies has improved due to technical advances such as rolling table platform and parallel imaging, which enable rapid assessment of the entire musculoskeletal system with high-quality images. WBMRI protocols should include T1-weighted and short-tau inversion recovery (STIR), which provide the basic pulse sequences for studying myopathies, in order to detect fatty infiltration/muscle atrophy and muscle edema, respectively. High signal intensity in T1-weighted images shows chronic disease with fatty infiltration, whereas high signal intensity in STIR indicates an acute stage with muscle edema. Additional sequences such as diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) can be readily incorporated into routine WBMRI study protocols. Contrast-enhanced sequences have not been done. This article reviews WBMRI as an imaging method to evaluate different myopathies (idiopathic inflammatory, dystrophic, non-dystrophic, metabolic, and channelopathies). WBMRI provides a comprehensive estimate of the total burden with a single study, seeking specific distribution patterns, including clinically silent involvement of muscle areas. Furthermore, WBMRI may help to select the "target muscle area" for biopsy during patient follow-up. It may be also be used to detect related and non-related pathological conditions, such as tumors.