SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … disability (ID), absent speech or speech limited to single words along with … list DHX9 as associated with human disease, two very recent studies identified pathogenic variants in DHX9 in …

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 … The degree of cognitive impairment ranged from autism spectrum disorder with speech …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] GA4GH phenopacket-driven characterization of genotype-phenotype correlations in Mendelian disorders
    L Rekerle, D Danis, F Rehburg, ASL Graefe… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00472-0
    snippet: Comprehensively characterizing genotype-phenotype correlations (GPCs) in Mendelian disease would create new opportunities for improving clinical management and understanding …
    abstract: Comprehensively characterizing genotype-phenotype correlations (GPCs) in Mendelian disease would create new opportunities for improving clinical management and understanding disease biology. However, heterogeneous approaches to data sharing, reuse, and analysis have hindered progress in the field. We developed Genotype-Phenotype Statistical Evaluation of Associations (GPSEA), a software package that leverages the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) Phenopacket Schema to represent case-level clinical and genetic data about individuals. GPSEA applies an independent filtering strategy to boost statistical power to detect categorical GPCs represented by Human Phenotype Ontology terms. GPSEA additionally enables visualization and analysis of continuous phenotypes, clinical severity scores, and survival data such as age of onset of disease or clinical manifestations. We applied GPSEA to 85 cohorts with 6,179 previously published individuals with variants in one of 81 genes associated with 122 Mendelian diseases and identified 253 significant GPCs, with 48 cohorts having at least one statistically significant GPC. These results highlight the power of standardized representations of clinical data for scalable discovery of GPCs in Mendelian disease.

[4] Article Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929723002148
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — The sequence of the nuclear localization signal is magnified, and the two key residues (Lys1163 and Arg1166) are underlined. DHX9's protein- ...

[5] MIAT-DHX9 spatiotemporal expression drives venous ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41259202 DOI:10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116578 https://www.cell.com/cell-reports/fulltext/S2211-1247(25)01350-6
    snippet: by Y Lou · 2025 · Cited by 2 — The C terminus of DHX9 contains an RGG domain, a nuclear localization signal ... 8. Calame, D.G. ∙ Guo, T. ∙ Wang, C. ... Monoallelic ...
    abstract: Venous neointimal hyperplasia, characterized by abnormal smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation, represents a critical contributor to stenosis and therapeutic failure following vascular interventions. Here, we identified spatiotemporal nucleolar expression of DExH-box helicase 9 (DHX9) and its binding partner, long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) myocardial infarction-associated transcript (MIAT), using multi-super-resolution imaging and single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In normal SMCs, DHX9 transiently localized to nucleoli during the early S phase. CRISPR-mediated MIAT activation facilitated DHX9's nucleolar localization and interaction with PARP1. MIAT also drove SMC proliferation by accelerating cell cycle progression. Depleting MIAT or DHX9 led to nucleolar disorganization, mitotic defects, and DNA damage. Using deep learning, we identified nucleolar-associated morphological features as potential biomarkers for cellular status and disease progression. In an ex vivo and animal model, knockdown of MIAT-DHX9 suppressed SMC proliferation and intimal hyperplasia. Our findings establish the MIAT-DHX9 axis as a central regulator of SMC nucleolar homeostasis and mitotic progression, offering a nucleolus-centered strategy to suppress neointimal hyperplasia.

[6] The role of DEAD- and DExH-box RNA helicases in ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:39149612 DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949 PMC11324592 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11324592/
    snippet: by J Lederbauer · 2024 · Cited by 4 — ... nuclear localization signal; NES, nuclear export signal; NTD, N-terminal ... Out of these, an association of DHX9 (Calame et al., 2023; Yamada et al ...
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) represent a large group of disorders with an onset in the neonatal or early childhood period; NDDs include intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum disorders (ASD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (ADHD), seizures, various motor disabilities and abnormal muscle tone. Among the many underlying Mendelian genetic causes for these conditions, genes coding for proteins involved in all aspects of the gene expression pathway, ranging from transcription, splicing, translation to the eventual RNA decay, feature rather prominently. Here we focus on two large families of RNA helicases (DEAD- and DExH-box helicases). Genetic variants in the coding genes for several helicases have recently been shown to be associated with NDD. We address genetic constraints for helicases, types of pathological variants which have been discovered and discuss the biological pathways in which the affected helicase proteins are involved.

[7] 620988 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620988
    snippet: ... nuclear localization signal ... The heterozygous mutations in the DHX9 gene that were identified in patients with MRD75 by Calame et al.

[8] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[9] Monoallelic variation in DHX9 , the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369072477_Monoallelic_variation_in_DHX9_the_gene_encoding_the_DExH-box_helicase_DHX9_underlies_neurodevelopment_disorders_and_Charcot-Marie-Tooth_disease
    snippet: We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[10] Pathogenic variation in R-loop helicase gene DHX9 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mdaconference.org/abstract-library/pathogenic-variation-in-r-loop-helicase-gene-dhx9-causes-axonal-neuropathy-and-neurodevelopmental-disorders/
    snippet: Daniel Calame, MD, The gene DHX9 exhibits the highest mutational constraint to loss-of-function (LoF) and missense variation of all DDX-DHX helicases; NLS ...