SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 encodes a member of the MSL complex, an epigenetic regulator acetylating histone H4. We identify MSL2 … delay, motor issues, seizures, dysmorphisms, and a specific blood …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Homozygous Deletion of the Epigenetic Regulator PHF20 in Individuals With Neurodevelopmental Disorder
    SY Dagan, H Xuan, J Rips, E Paz (2025)
    DOI:10.1155/humu/6484814 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/humu/6484814
    snippet: … variants in MSL2 lead to Karayol–Borroto–… , dysmorphism, and autism. Interestingly, global H4K16ac levels were unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants, although expression of MSL2 …
    abstract: <i>PHF20</i> encodes plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20), a component of the KAT8-containing nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex that deposits acetylation on histone H4 to activate gene expression. We report two unrelated individuals with developmental delay, microcephaly, and distinctive facial features, in whom exome sequencing and chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> that segregated with the disease phenotype in their families. Breakpoint junction sequencing revealed an <i>Alu-Alu</i>-mediated deletion event. Western blot in cells from an affected individual showed undetectable PHF20, while levels of other NSL complex subunits were unaltered. Transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis revealed significant downregulation of gene pathways related to cell projection and neuronal development, associated with reduced histone H4K16 acetylation at these genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> leads to a neurodevelopmental syndrome, potentially through targeted epigenetic dysregulation and altered gene expression essential for neuronal development. Identifying additional families with biallelic <i>PHF20</i> variants will further delineate the phenotypic spectrum, and molecular studies in neuronal cell lines will be essential for understanding the disease mechanism.

[3] The evolving landscape of functional models of autism spectrum disorder
    J Ranjan, A Bhattacharya (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4409/14/12/908
    snippet: … MSL2 Biallelic expression of dosage sensitive genes, histone H4 acetylation 3q22.3 Homozygous KO Heterogenous phenotype and perinatal lethality Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1-3% of the population globally. Owing to its multifactorial origin, complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to faithfully model ASD. In essence, ASD is an umbrella term for a group of individually rare disorders, each risk gene accounting for <1% of cases, threaded by a set of overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral tests are considered a gold standard for ASD diagnosis, and several animal models (rodents, pigs, and non-human primates) have traditionally been used to study its molecular basis. These models recapitulate the human phenotype to a varying degree and have been indispensable to preclinical research, but they cannot be used to study human-specific features such as protracted neuronal maturation and cell-intrinsic attributes, posing serious limitations to translatability. Human stem cell-based models, both as monolayer 2D cultures and 3D organoids and assembloids, can circumvent these limitations. Generated from a patient's own reprogrammed cells, these can be used for testing therapeutic interventions that are more condition and patient relevant, targeting developmental windows where the intervention would be most effective. We discuss some of these advancements by comparing traditional and recent models of ASD.

[4] Accurate and cost-effective workflow integrating trio pooled-WES for novel gene discovery in neurodevelopmental disorders
    L López (2026)
    PMID:41826713 DOI:10.1038/s41431-026-02075-0 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02075-0
    snippet: … dysmorphic or syndromic forms (n = 153, 69.23%), defined by the presence of >5 facial dysmorphisms … a few reported cases in the literature, such as MSL2 [34], UBAP2L [35] or GTF3C3 …
    abstract: The broad genetic heterogeneity of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) makes their molecular diagnosis particularly challenging. In this context, Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES), specifically in a trio-based design, is a powerful strategy due to its ability to detect de novo variants, which are a major contributor to NDDs. However, its clinical implementation is often limited by its associated cost. In this study, we applied a sequential diagnostic workflow to a cohort of 221 individuals with syndromic NDDs and prior negative results from targeted sequencing. The workflow integrates initial solo-WES, followed by a second-tier trio-WES using pooled parental DNA (trio pooled-WES). Overall, this workflow achieved a diagnostic yield of 20.98% and led to the identification of 13 novel candidate genes. The pooling strategy was optimized and validated, demonstrating that trio pooled-WES retains the main advantages of conventional trio-WES while substantially reducing sequencing costs. These results support its implementation as a clinically applicable approach for the genetic diagnosis of NDDs.

[5] Stage-specific epigenetic priming amplifies gene activation during lineage commitment
    …, W Deboutte, H Holz, M Shvedunova, R Karayol… (2026)
    DOI:10.1126/sciadv.adz8889 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.adz8889
    snippet: … with mutations in Kat8, Msl2, and Msl3 (14–16). Whereas Msl2 KO does not influence the … therefore has a compound phenotype whereby it reduces both MSL2 and H4K16ac levels. …
    abstract: Neural progenitor cells exhibit developmental plasticity as they can commit to distinct developmental trajectories. The male-specific lethal complex (MSLc) is linked to multiple developmental disorders, suggesting a role in neural fate commitment. To dissect MSLc function, we used a multipronged approach combining chronic and acute depletion models. Knockout of the MSLc scaffolding component MSL1 caused embryonic lethality by E10.5 (embryonic day 10.5), and single-cell multiomics revealed altered cell population composition across multiple germ layer-derived lineages, including neuroectoderm. Two-dimensional directed differentiation models showed that the MSLc facilitates accessibility at regulatory elements during early stages of neurogenesis. Neurodevelopmental genes displayed reduced enhancer-promoter contacts and failed to reach appropriate expression levels when the MSLc was absent early in neural differentiation. In contrast, MSLc loss at later stages did not recapitulate this phenotype, indicating that MSLc-mediated gene priming is a key mechanism enabling timely activation of lineage-specifying transcriptional programs.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929724001642
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — We also provide evidence that start-loss or missense MSL2 variants may be pathogenic leading to the MSL2-related disorder phenotype. ... Karayol ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: (2024) identified a total of 21 different heterozygous mutations in the MSL2 gene in 25 unrelated patients with Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas ...

[8] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380990091_MSL2_variants_lead_to_a_neurodevelopmental_syndrome_with_lack_of_coordination_epilepsy_specific_dysmorphisms_and_a_distinct_episignature
    snippet: MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[9] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38815585 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.05.001 https://cris.maastrichtuniversity.nl/en/publications/msl2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-with-lack-of-/fingerprints/
    snippet: MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature. Remzi Karayol ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[10] MSL2 gene MSL Complex Subunit 2
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/MSL2
    snippet: Pathogenic variants in MSL2 are reported in Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome and autism, and the gene is linked to a broader complex ...