SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] OUH - Publications
    (authors not shown)
    https://ous-research.no/home/cnc/Publications/11843
    snippet: Vocal Cord Paresis and Neuropathic Pain in Infantile Leukoencephalopathy ... Variants of NAV3, a neuronal morphogenesis protein, cause intellectual ...

[2] exome capture sequencing: Topics by ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.science.gov/topicpages/e/exome+capture+sequencing.html
    snippet: Histopathology studies of cornea and vocal cord biopsies showed dyskeratotic keratinisation. ... NAV3, NAV1, FZD1 and ATRX), expressed in neuroblastoma and ...

[3] Publications, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ous-research.no/pam/?k=pam%2FPublications&aid=16233
    snippet: Vocal Cord Paresis and Neuropathic Pain in Infantile Leukoencephalopathy ... Variants of NAV3, a neuronal morphogenesis protein, cause intellectual ...

[4] aggressive tumor subtype: Topics by ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.science.gov/topicpages/a/aggressive+tumor+subtype
    snippet: ... vocal cord and grew rapidly beneath the glottis, causing dyspnea. After 2 ... NAV3, NAV1, FZD1 and ATRX), expressed in neuroblastoma and involved in ...

[5] whole-exome sequencing wes: Topics by ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.science.gov/topicpages/w/whole-exome+sequencing+wes
    snippet: ... vocal cord and diaphragm paralysis were highly evocative of a GDAP1-related CMT. ... NAV3, NAV1, FZD1 and ATRX), expressed in neuroblastoma and involved in ...

[6] CLCN4 ‐Related Neurodevelopmental Condition: Characterization of Speech and Language Abilities
    A Garrett, VM Kalscheuer, RR Figueroa… (2025)
    PMID:40762462 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.64192 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.64192
    snippet: … from their child's speech pathologist: Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS, … disorder (2/13), language impairment (5/13), voice … voice dysfunction and left vocal cord paralysis with no other …
    abstract: Speech and language difficulties are a core feature of the CLCN4-related neurodevelopmental condition, but these have not been well described. Here we systematically phenotype speech and language in 13 participants (10 female, aged 1 year 10 months-41 years 10 months) with pathogenic CLCN4 variants (12 missense de novo, 1 premature stop codon maternal inheritance). Speech, language, and augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) methods were examined. Expressive and receptive language conditions were highly penetrant (12/13, 92%). Eight participants were minimally verbal but used a range of low (e.g., gesture) and high-tech (e.g., device) methods to communicate. Verbal participants had both apraxia and dysarthria, characterized by inconsistent productions, sound distortions, resonance changes, and persistent voice quality and prosodic errors. Participants were all intentional communicators, being motivated to get their message across. A discrepancy was present, however, between the ability to express basic needs versus demonstrate social skills or social exchanges. Data highlight the potential for the implementation of tailored AAC to enhance functional social participation and extend language abilities. Communication difficulties are pervasive in CLCN4-related neurodevelopmental condition. Data emphasize the importance of individualized and timely speech therapy, and particularly the introduction of AAC to optimize language growth.

[7] Genomics of speech and language disorders
    J Guerra, R Cacabelos (2019)
    DOI:10.20944/preprints201809.0492.v2 https://www.oaepublish.com/articles/jtgg.2018.03
    snippet: … Speech disorders, such as childhood apraxia of speech, … , dyslexia or developmental language disorder are the main … in the vocal folds that selectively affect speech production. Its …
    abstract: There are multiple factors involved in speech and language. Investigating animal models, mainly through songbirds, have allowed a better understanding of the language process. Verbal dyspraxia, dysarthria, speech sound disorder, and stuttering are some examples of speech disorders, and specific language disorder, aphasia and, dyslexia of language disorders. More complex syndromes such as Autism-spectrum disorders, Down&rsquo;s or Fragile X have more variable features. Genetic factors, such as hereditary or de novo mutations may be responsible for their development. In addition, most of them are involved in neurodevelopment with a huge range of molecular mechanisms and pathways that interact with each other, and there may be co-morbidity with other communication disorders or develop phenotypes unrelated to communication. Genes with heterogeneous functions in speech and language such as FOXP1, FOXP2, KIAA0319, ROBO1, APOE or CNTNAP2 are some examples. Epigenetic factors, especially miRNAs, influence their expressiveness. The genomics of these disorders allows us to understand language acquisition, carry out early detection strategies, genetic counseling and optimize future treatments, not only in communication disorders but also those neurological alterations that incorporate these mutations.

[8] The clinical and genetic spectrum of paediatric speech and language disorders
    JH Magielski, SM Ruggiero, J Xian, S Parthasarathy… (2025)
    PMID:39412438 DOI:10.1093/brain/awae264 https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/2/663/7814581
    snippet: … We found that aphasia and speech apraxia could be retrieved easily through ICD-10 … previously as a cause of autosomal recessive butyrylcholinesterase deficiency (MIM: 617936) and …
    abstract: Speech and language disorders are known to have a substantial genetic contribution. Although frequently examined as components of other conditions, research on the genetic basis of linguistic differences as separate phenotypic subgroups has been limited so far. Here, we performed an in-depth characterization of speech and language disorders in 52 143 individuals, reconstructing clinical histories using a large-scale data-mining approach of the electronic medical records from an entire large paediatric healthcare network. The reported frequency of these disorders was the highest between 2 and 5 years old and spanned a spectrum of 26 broad speech and language diagnoses. We used natural language processing to assess the degree to which clinical diagnoses in full-text notes were reflected in ICD-10 diagnosis codes. We found that aphasia and speech apraxia could be retrieved easily through ICD-10 diagnosis codes, whereas stuttering as a speech phenotype was coded in only 12% of individuals through appropriate ICD-10 codes. We found significant comorbidity of speech and language disorders in neurodevelopmental conditions (30.31%) and, to a lesser degree, with epilepsies (6.07%) and movement disorders (2.05%). The most common genetic disorders retrievable in our analysis of electronic medical records were STXBP1 (n = 21), PTEN (n = 20) and CACNA1A (n = 18). When assessing associations of genetic diagnoses with specific linguistic phenotypes, we observed associations of STXBP1 and aphasia (P = 8.57 × 10-7, 95% confidence interval = 18.62-130.39) and MYO7A with speech and language development delay attributable to hearing loss (P = 1.24 × 10-5, 95% confidence interval = 17.46-infinity). Finally, in a sub-cohort of 726 individuals with whole-exome sequencing data, we identified an enrichment of rare variants in neuronal receptor pathways, in addition to associations of UQCRC1 and KIF17 with expressive aphasia, MROH8 and BCHE with poor speech, and USP37, SLC22A9 and UMODL1 with aphasia. In summary, our study outlines the landscape of paediatric speech and language disorders, confirming the phenotypic complexity of linguistic traits and novel genotype-phenotype associations. Subgroups of paediatric speech and language disorders differ significantly with respect to the composition of monogenic aetiologies.

[9] Further evidence of biallelic NAV3 variants associated with recessive neurodevelopmental disorder with dysmorphism, developmental delay, intellectual disability …
    N Kakar, S Mascarenhas, A Ali, Azmatullah… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-024-02718-6 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-024-02718-6
    snippet: … and young adult human brains revealed that NAV3 is highly expressed in the excitatory … In conclusion, in this study, we further validate biallelic protein truncating variants in NAV3 …
    abstract: Neuron navigators (NAVs) are cytoskeleton-associated proteins well known for their role in axonal guidance, neuronal migration, and neurite growth necessary for neurodevelopment. Neuron navigator 3 (NAV3) is one of the three NAV proteins highly expressed in the embryonic and adult brain. However, the role of the NAV3 gene in human disease is not well-studied. Recently, five bi-allelic and three mono-allelic variants in NAV3 were reported in 12 individuals from eight unrelated families with neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD). Here, we report five patients from three unrelated consanguineous families segregating autosomal recessive NDD. Patients have symptoms of dysmorphism, intellectual disability, developmental delay, and behavioral abnormalities. Exome sequencing (ES) was performed on two affected individuals from one large family, and one affected individual from each of the other two families. ES revealed two homozygous nonsense c.6325C > T; p.(Gln2109Ter) and c.6577C > T; p.(Arg2193Ter) and a homozygous splice site (c.243 + 1G > T) variants in the NAV3 (NM_001024383.2). Analysis of single-cell sequencing datasets from embryonic and young adult human brains revealed that NAV3 is highly expressed in the excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, and microglia, consistent with its role in neurodevelopment. In conclusion, in this study, we further validate biallelic protein truncating variants in NAV3 as a cause of NDD, expanding the spectrum of pathogenic variants in this newly discovered NDD gene.

[10] Departamento de Neurociencias
    G SEQUENCING (2022)
    https://repositorio.uam.es/server/api/core/bitstreams/16d70a52-9d35-402d-b08c-6fe886a7dace/content
    snippet: … Several years later, significant upward vertical palsy and ocular apraxia was observed. Regarding … She had apraxia of the eye movements, with no eyelid opening apraxia. She had mild …
    abstract: In the past years there has been an increasing interest in the surgical therapies for Parkinson's disease. This renewed interest is related to differents factors. First, pharmacological treatments are still unable to alter substantially the progression of the disease and after a few years they generally cause motor complications and dyskinesias. Secondly, the great advances in the surgical techniques, especially with the improvement of stereotactic surgery, have decreased morbidity in recent years. Finally, the introduction of deep brain stimulation, now allows surgical treatment without damaging brain structures. In this review, different surgical treatments are summarized. Ablative surgery, deep brain stimulation and reinervation therapies are described.