SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac… variants in autism spectrum disorder (ASD).In addition, two … expression of MSL2 and other complex members MOF (KAT8) …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs neurogenesis, and alters histone H4K16 acetylation
    S Luo, S Qu, S Tan, Z Song, Y Lv, X Jia, J Tan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf
    snippet: … and clinical phenotype data of MSL2, MSL3 and KAT8 from three case series studies [… MSL2 variants carriers showed high prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (64.3%), while MSL3 …

[3] Two Chinese patients with Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome caused by novel MSL3 variants: a case report and literature review
    Y Qing, F Hu, W Su, Y Wang, Y Chen… (2025)
    PMID:41216464 DOI:10.21037/tp-2025-227 PMC12597176 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12597176/
    snippet: … The MSL complex-associated histone acetyltransferase KAT8 regulates histone H4 lysine 16 … In human, MSL1, MSL2, MSL3, and MOF (males absent on the first) form core components …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>MSL3 is a subunit of the chromatin-associated male-specific lethal (MSL) complex that regulates global histone H4 lysine-16 acetylation (H4K16ac) that plays a critical role as an epigenetic regulator in flies and mammals. Variants of <i>MSL3</i> have been reported to cause an ultra-rare developmental disorder, Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome (MRXSBA) (OMIM #301032), which is characterized by global development delay, intellectual disability (ID), muscular hypotonia and progressive spasticity. To date, only 42 patients with MRXSBA have been reported around the world, and the diagnosis and treatment of MRXSBA remain challenging.<h4>Case description</h4>We present two cases: an 8-year-old girl and a 4-year-11-month-old boy. Two patients mainly exhibiting slightly ID and slightly dysmorphic facial features received a diagnosis of MRXSBA. The next generation sequencing identified two damaging novel <i>MSL3</i> variants in two individuals, including one nonsense variant (c.570C>G, p. Tyr190*) and one splicing variant (c.1466+2T>C), which were validated by Sanger sequencing. They all affected the morf-related gene (MRG) domain of MSL3, consistent with all deleterious variants previously reported. The phenotypes of Chinese patients with MRXSBA were summarized and compared to MRXSBA patients of other ethnicities reported previously. Hypotonia and macrocephaly prevalence were markedly higher in individuals of other ethnicities, while other clinical phenotypes demonstrated comparable frequencies. Four novel phenotypic characteristics of MRXSBA individuals were identified, including growth hormone deficiency (GHD), slow growth of permanent teeth, scoliosis, and cleft palate. The individual with GHD received recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment and underwent long-term follow-up exceeding 10 years during routine clinic visits. He demonstrated good height improvement following rhGH treatment. No secondary adverse effects were observed.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our study expands the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome. Our data support the notion that the MRG domain of MSL3 is intolerant to loss-of-function variants and responsible for MSL3 function. Over 10 years of clinical follow-up indicates that rhGH treatment could be an option to improve the height in individuals with MRXSBA and GHD. Our study lays an important foundation for the precise diagnosis and therapeutic approaches of MRXSBA.

[4] Deciphering the genetic mechanisms underlying Alzheimer's Disease
    ZM Daysh (2025)
    https://researchspace.auckland.ac.nz/bitstreams/acb96684-a98d-4d03-b891-67758c24cc36/download
    snippet: … as being enriched for KAT8:INO80E PPIN genes in various age groups and tissues ...... 66 … (eg epilepsy, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder). This suggested an important role of …

[5] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC13375992 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13375992/
    snippet: ... (KAT8), MSL3, and MSL2 (Fig. 1A) and NDDs. To systematically delineate the ... MSL2 variants carriers showed high prevalence of autism spectrum disorder ...
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are frequently associated with dysregulation of epigenetic mechanisms. Recent studies have implicated variants in components of the Male-Specific Lethal (MSL) complex, including MSL2, in NDD pathogenesis. However, the pathogenic mechanisms underlying MSL2-related neurodevelopmental disorders remain poorly defined. Here, we elucidate the role of MSL2 in neurodevelopment and NDDs through comprehensive analysis of conditional knockout mice and multi-omics profiling. Aggregation of published and unpublished genomic data and case series revealed that pathogenic variants in MSL complex components, including MSL2, presented with shared phenotypes. Using a nervous system-specific Msl2 conditional knockout mouse model, we demonstrate that Msl2 deficiency leads to impaired social novelty recognition, learning deficits, and spatial memory impairments. These behavioral abnormalities are characterized by disrupted neocortical lamination, compromised proliferation capacity and differentiative ability of neural progenitor cells, and reduced neuronal migration. Mechanistically, Msl2-deficient brains exhibit significantly reduced levels of histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac), particularly at promoter regions. Integrated RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and ATAC-seq analyses revealed widespread transcriptional downregulation and loss of chromatin accessibility at NDD-related genes. Variants in the MSL2 DNA-binding domain disrupted its ability to target key regulatory genes including FMR1, confirming direct epigenetic regulation. Together, these findings demonstrate that MSL2 promotes neurodevelopment primarily by maintaining chromatin accessibility through H4K16ac deposition, and its disruption underlies the molecular and behavioral hallmarks of NDDs.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929724001642
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — ... MSL2, MSL3, and MOF. MOF is the acetyltransferase and MSL3 is ... The expression of MSL2 and other complex members MOF (KAT8) and MSL1 ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/MSL2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-Karayol-Borroto/3003d40e10d363a05c4c8608a401917b44a1b045
    snippet: ... autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent ... MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac ... KAT8-mediated epigenetic modifications ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380990091_MSL2_variants_lead_to_a_neurodevelopmental_syndrome_with_lack_of_coordination_epilepsy_specific_dysmorphisms_and_a_distinct_episignature
    snippet: in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). 16. In addition, two. MSL2 protein ... (KAT8), MSL3, and MSL2 ( Fig. 1A) and NDDs. To systematically ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[9] MSL2 gene MSL Complex Subunit 2
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/MSL2
    snippet: ... KAT8/MOF/MYST1, MSL1/hampin, MSL2 and MSL3. Forms a MSL heterotetrameric ... autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit, dysmorphic features, and ...

[10] Stage-specific epigenetic priming amplifies gene activation during lineage commitment
    …, W Deboutte, H Holz, M Shvedunova, R Karayol… (2026)
    DOI:10.1126/sciadv.adz8889 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.adz8889
    snippet: … MSL1, MSL2, and MSL3, as well as the histone acetyltransferase males absent on the first (MOF, also known as KAT8)… Our analysis revealed notable differences in cell type composition …
    abstract: Neural progenitor cells exhibit developmental plasticity as they can commit to distinct developmental trajectories. The male-specific lethal complex (MSLc) is linked to multiple developmental disorders, suggesting a role in neural fate commitment. To dissect MSLc function, we used a multipronged approach combining chronic and acute depletion models. Knockout of the MSLc scaffolding component MSL1 caused embryonic lethality by E10.5 (embryonic day 10.5), and single-cell multiomics revealed altered cell population composition across multiple germ layer-derived lineages, including neuroectoderm. Two-dimensional directed differentiation models showed that the MSLc facilitates accessibility at regulatory elements during early stages of neurogenesis. Neurodevelopmental genes displayed reduced enhancer-promoter contacts and failed to reach appropriate expression levels when the MSLc was absent early in neural differentiation. In contrast, MSLc loss at later stages did not recapitulate this phenotype, indicating that MSLc-mediated gene priming is a key mechanism enabling timely activation of lineage-specifying transcriptional programs.