SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was … DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[2] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … cerebral atrophy and thinning of the corpus callosum on MRI.Taken together, these findings … Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.

[3] DDX3X syndrome: From clinical phenotypes to biological insights
    A von Mueffling, M Garcia‐Forn… (2024)
    DOI:10.1111/jnc.16174 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jnc.16174
    snippet: … 34% in non- PMG), partial agenesis of the corpus callosum (27% in PMG vs. 1% in non- PMG) and cardiac findings (see discussion below; Lennox et al., 2020). In line with these …
    abstract: DDX3X syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder accounting for up to 3% of cases of intellectual disability (ID) and affecting primarily females. Individuals diagnosed with DDX3X syndrome can also present with behavioral challenges, motor delays and movement disorders, epilepsy, and congenital malformations. DDX3X syndrome is caused by mutations in the X-linked gene DDX3X, which encodes a DEAD-box RNA helicase with critical roles in RNA metabolism, including mRNA translation. Emerging discoveries from animal models are unveiling a fundamental role of DDX3X in neuronal differentiation and development, especially in the neocortex. Here, we review the current knowledge of genetic and neurobiological mechanisms underlying DDX3X syndrome and their relationship with clinical phenotypes.

[4] The epilepsy–autism phenotype associated with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies: New mechanism‐based therapeutic options
    N Specchio, V Di Micco, E Aronica, S Auvin… (2025)
    DOI:10.1111/epi.18209 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/epi.18209
    snippet: … Two DHX9- a ssociated disease traits have been recently … that pathogenic DHX9 variants cause abnormal DHX9 cellular … and corpus callosum defects. Brain. 2023;146:1373–87. …
    abstract: Epilepsy and autism often co-occur in genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs), but their underlying neurobiological processes remain poorly understood, complicating treatment. Advances in molecular genetics and understanding the neurodevelopmental pathogenesis of the epilepsy-autism phenotype may lead to mechanism-based treatments for children with DEEs and autism. Several genes, including the newly reported PPFIA3, MYCBP2, DHX9, TMEM63B, and RELN, are linked to various neurodevelopmental and epileptic disorders, intellectual disabilities, and autistic features. These findings underscore the clinical heterogeneity of genetic DEEs and suggest diverse neurobiological mechanisms influenced by genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. Mechanisms linking epilepsy and autism include γ-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) signaling dysregulation, synaptic plasticity, disrupted functional connectivity, and neuroinflammatory responses. GABA system abnormalities, critical for inhibitory neurotransmission, contribute to both conditions. Dysregulation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and neuroinflammation are also pivotal, affecting seizure generation, drug resistance, and neuropsychiatric comorbidities. Abnormal synaptic function and connectivity further underscore the epilepsy-autism phenotype. New treatment options targeting specific mechanisms linked to the epilepsy-autism phenotype are emerging. Genetic variants in potassium channel genes like KCNQ2 and KCNT1 are frequent causes of early onset DEEs. Personalized treatments like retigabine and quinidine have been explored with heterogeneous responses. Efforts are ongoing to develop more effective KCNQ activators and KCNT1 blockers. SCN1A genetic variants, particularly in Dravet syndrome, show potential for treatment of autistic symptoms with low-dose clonazepam, fenfluramine, and cannabidiol, although human trials have yet to consistently replicate animal model successes. Early intervention before the age of 3 years, particularly in SCN1A- and tuberous sclerosis complex-related DEEs, is crucial. Additionally, targeting the mTOR pathway shows promise for seizure control and managing epilepsy-associated comorbidities. Understanding the distinct autism spectrum disorder phenotype in DEEs and implementing early behavioral interventions are essential for improving outcomes. Despite genetic advances, significant challenges persist in diagnosing and treating DEE-associated epi

[5] Axonal motor polyneuropathy in a 13 years old Girl with a de Novo variant in ADNP
    S Scaccini, CA Cesaroni, SG Caraffi, S Rizzi, S Rosato… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w
    snippet: … Brain MRI, performed at two years of age, showed global reduction of the supratentorial white matter, volumetric reduction of the middle third of the corpus callosum, slight enlargement …
    abstract: ADNP-Related Disorder [previously known as Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome (HVDAS)] is a rare genetic condition resulting from mutations in the activity-dependent neuroprotector homeobox (ADNP) gene. The ADNP protein has multiple functions, including serving as an essential transcription factor for brain development. In addition, pathogenic variants in ADNP have been recognized as one of the most frequent monogenic causes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability. Clinical features include craniofacial dysmorphisms, congenital heart defects, gastrointestinal problems such as feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux and frequent vomiting, vision problems, recurrent infections and seizures. Here we describe the novel case of a girl who came to our attention in infancy because of poor and stereotyped motor repertoire, repetitive purposeless movements, and intellectual disability. Whole exome sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous variant in the ADNP gene, leading to the diagnosis of HVDAS at age 5 years. At the age of 12, nerve conduction velocity testing showed severe four-limb axonal motor polyneuropathy. In this article, we would like to focus on the presence of peripheral nervous system involvement associated with the pathogenic ADNP de novo variant, which may contribute to the clinical characterization of ADNP-Related Disorder.

[6] Bi-allelic UGGT1 variants cause a congenital disorder of glycosylation
    Z Dardas, L Harrold, DG Calame, CG Salter… (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00139-9
    snippet: … , corpus callosum thinning, and cerebellar vermian atrophy versus hypoplasia (Figures 3J–3M). … (2023). Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) comprise a large heterogeneous group of metabolic conditions caused by defects in glycoprotein and glycolipid glycan assembly and remodeling, a fundamental molecular process with wide-ranging biological roles. Herein, we describe bi-allelic UGGT1 variants in fifteen individuals from ten unrelated families of various ethnic backgrounds as a cause of a distinctive CDG of variable severity. The cardinal clinical features of UGGT1-CDG involve developmental delay, intellectual disability, seizures, characteristic facial features, and microcephaly in the majority (9/11 affected individuals for whom measurements were available). The more severely affected individuals display congenital heart malformations, variable skeletal abnormalities including scoliosis, and hepatic and renal involvement, including polycystic kidneys mimicking autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. Clinical studies defined genotype-phenotype correlations, showing bi-allelic UGGT1 loss-of-function variants associated with increased disease severity, including death in infancy. UGGT1 encodes UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase 1, an enzyme critical for maintaining quality control of N-linked glycosylation. Molecular studies showed that pathogenic UGGT1 variants impair UGGT1 glucosylation and catalytic activity, disrupt mRNA splicing, or inhibit endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention. Collectively, our data provide a comprehensive genetic, clinical, and molecular characterization of UGGT1-CDG, broadening the spectrum of N-linked glycosylation disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … matter loss, small corpus callosum, enlarged extracerebral … the absence of seizures, brain imaging anomalies, or multisystemic … DHX9 is used as the loading control. Immunoblotting on …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — The yellow arrow indicates a thin corpus callosum. Red arrows indicate cerebellar atrophy. Yellow arrowheads show enlargement of the ventricles, ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[9] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text
    snippet: Imaging findings included white matter volume loss with enlargement of the ventricles, corpus callosum thinning, and cerebral and cerebellar ...

[10] Neuroimaging of Pediatric Cerebellum in Inherited ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/18/8522
    snippet: by L Chiapparini · 2021 · Cited by 5 — Brain MRI scan of a 10-year-old girl. MR images show marked global cerebellar atrophy with a thin corpus callosum and hypomyelination throughout ...