SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Expanding the clinical spectrum of RAB3A: from cerebellar ataxia to spastic paraplegia
    C Mouraux, JL Méreaux, CS Davoine, L Guillot (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/11/e96/8175149
    snippet: … Arg83Trp and autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia. The prevalence of pathogenic variants in RAB3A in our cohort of 1235 exomes from ataxia and/… the phenotypic spectrum of RAB3A-…

[2] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a partial loss-of-function mechanism
    H Hengel, SB Hannan, S Reich, D Beijer, J Roller… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/148/8/2812/8102230
    snippet: … Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as … interaction between RAB3A containing the variant Arg83Trp and Rabphilin-3A, whereas other …
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[3] The RAB3A hot spot variant R83W causes spasticity as part of the ataxia-spasticity spectrum
    JR Roller, A Yahia, G Stevanin, AE Ahmed… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/4/e36/8408500
    snippet: … Arg83Trp), which we had previously identified in nine unrelated families presenting with pure cerebellar ataxia… To further and precisely explore the phenotypic spectrum of RAB3A, we …

[4] An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant cerebellar ataxia
    R Miyamoto, A Sakane, H Morino… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/35/3/ddaf186/8415318
    snippet: … RAB3A variant, c.247C > T p.(Arg83Trp), in two families with adult-onset cerebellar ataxia … autosomal-dominant ataxia with complex phenotypes, including neurodevelopmental …
    abstract: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders caused by pathogenic variants in more than 40 genes with diverse cellular functions. In this study, we identified the c.247C > T p.(Arg83Trp) variant in RAB3A, encoding a small GTPase involved in membrane-associated regulated exocytosis, in two families with cerebellar ataxia. Affected individuals presented with adult-onset, gradually progressive cerebellar symptoms, often accompanied by mild gait spasticity and tremors. Variable features of neurodevelopmental disorders were also observed. Brain MRI consistently revealed cerebellar atrophy, often accentuated in the vermis, and neuropathological examinations demonstrated diffuse cerebellar cortical degeneration. Functionally, the R83W mutation lies within the conserved switch II region of Rab3A, a domain critical for effector interaction. Although the mutant Rab3A R83W retained GTP-binding affinity, it failed to bind the key effector proteins RIM1 and Rabphilin-3A, highlighting the functional importance of R83 in effector complex formation, as supported by structural analysis. In PC12 cells, the R83W mutant exhibited diffuse cytoplasmic localization, in contrast to the vesicle- and neurite-tip localization of the wild-type and GTP-bound Rab3A mutant. The concordant localization pattern of R83W and GDP-bound Rab3A mutants suggests that R83W-induced mislocalization results from a failure to engage downstream effector proteins. In the cerebellum, Rab3A was predominantly localized to parallel fiber terminals and was absent from postsynaptic Purkinje cells. These findings suggest that disruption of the interaction between Rab3A and its effector proteins may underlie disease pathogenesis, possibly involving presynaptic dysfunction at parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses mediated by the Rab3A-RIM1 complex.

[5] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/40166812/
    snippet: by H Hengel · 2025 · Cited by 8 — To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened ... RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function ...
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[6] Heterozygous RAB3A variants cause cerebellar ataxia by a ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12316009 https://europepmc.org/articles/pmc12316009?pdf=render
    snippet: by H Hengel · 2025 · Cited by 6 — ... RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In ... We screened for patients with rare heterozygous RAB3A variants and ataxia–spasticity spec- trum26 phenotype features.
    abstract: RAB3A encodes a small GTP-binding protein that is abundant in brain synaptic vesicles and crucial for the release of neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity. Here, we identified RAB3A as a candidate gene for autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia by two independent approaches: linkage in a large dominant ataxia family and, in parallel, an untargeted computational genetic association approach, analysing the 100 000 Genomes Project datasets. To validate the role of RAB3A in ataxia, we next screened large rare disease databases for rare heterozygous RAB3A variants in probands with ataxia features. In total, we identified 18 individuals from 10 unrelated families all sharing a cerebellar ataxia phenotype. Notably, 9 of the 10 families carried a recurrent variant in RAB3A, p.Arg83Trp, including one de novo occurrence. In addition, our screening revealed three families with a neurodevelopmental phenotype and three unique RAB3A variants, which were either de novo or loss-of-function variants. In line with the different RAB3A variant types, protein domains and predicted functional consequences, a comprehensive set of complementary methods was used to characterize the identified variants functionally. As expected, GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-dependent GTP hydrolysis was reduced for those two missense variants located in the GAP-binding domain of RAB3A (Arg83Trp and Tyr91Cys). In a Drosophila Rab3 loss-of-function model, these two missense variants also failed to rescue a synaptic phenotype. Overexpression of Rab3 variants in Drosophila wild-type background did not cause an obvious phenotype, making a dominant negative effect of these variants unlikely. Lastly, exploring interactors of RAB3A variants by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry showed differential changes in variant-specific interactions with known RAB3A key regulatory and effector proteins. In sum, our results establish RAB3A as a neurological disease gene. It represents an autosomal dominant gene for cerebellar ataxia with different variants associated with disease, including the frequent reoccurring variant p.Arg83Trp. Our study sheds light on the variant-specific interactome of RAB3A. Finally, we suggest an association of RAB3A with a neurodevelopmental phenotype, as reported for variants in several RAB3A interaction partners and as seen in Rab3A-deficent mice, although this possible association warrants further investigation by future studies.

[7] 1 Title: An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal- ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.07.16.25330541.full.pdf https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.07.16.25330541.full.pdf
    snippet: by R Miyamoto · 2025 — In this study, we identified a pathogenic RAB3A variant, c.247C>T p.(Arg83Trp), in two families with adult-onset cerebellar ataxia and variable ...

[8] Gene: RAB3A (Hereditary ataxia)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/20/gene/RAB3A/
    snippet: Arg83Trp) was seen in 14 members from nine families. The age of onset of ... Phenotypes for gene: RAB3A were changed from cerebellar ataxia; pyramidal ...

[9] RAB3A variants in ataxia and other neurodegenerative disorders
    M Percetti, E Monfrini, R Del Bo, M Canesi, F Cavallieri… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/1/e1/8286274
    snippet: … Arg83Trp variant was identified in a patient with autosomal dominant … confirm that monoallelic RAB3A variants occur in patients with cerebellar ataxia and suggest that RAB3A may be …

[10] Ataxia: Dominant
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/ataxia/domatax.html
    snippet: Dominant Spinocerebellar Ataxia (SCA): General. Incidence: ~1 to 5 per 100,000; Average age of onset: 3rd decade; Mutation types. CAG repeats.