SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant cerebellar ataxia
    R Miyamoto, A Sakane, H Morino… (2026)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/35/3/ddaf186/8415318
    snippet: … Clinical phenotype The clinical characteristics of the affected individuals from Families T and K (… Furthermore, we screened 320 patients with spinocerebellar ataxia for RAB3A variants …
    abstract: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders caused by pathogenic variants in more than 40 genes with diverse cellular functions. In this study, we identified the c.247C > T p.(Arg83Trp) variant in RAB3A, encoding a small GTPase involved in membrane-associated regulated exocytosis, in two families with cerebellar ataxia. Affected individuals presented with adult-onset, gradually progressive cerebellar symptoms, often accompanied by mild gait spasticity and tremors. Variable features of neurodevelopmental disorders were also observed. Brain MRI consistently revealed cerebellar atrophy, often accentuated in the vermis, and neuropathological examinations demonstrated diffuse cerebellar cortical degeneration. Functionally, the R83W mutation lies within the conserved switch II region of Rab3A, a domain critical for effector interaction. Although the mutant Rab3A R83W retained GTP-binding affinity, it failed to bind the key effector proteins RIM1 and Rabphilin-3A, highlighting the functional importance of R83 in effector complex formation, as supported by structural analysis. In PC12 cells, the R83W mutant exhibited diffuse cytoplasmic localization, in contrast to the vesicle- and neurite-tip localization of the wild-type and GTP-bound Rab3A mutant. The concordant localization pattern of R83W and GDP-bound Rab3A mutants suggests that R83W-induced mislocalization results from a failure to engage downstream effector proteins. In the cerebellum, Rab3A was predominantly localized to parallel fiber terminals and was absent from postsynaptic Purkinje cells. These findings suggest that disruption of the interaction between Rab3A and its effector proteins may underlie disease pathogenesis, possibly involving presynaptic dysfunction at parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses mediated by the Rab3A-RIM1 complex.

[2] From genes to neuropathology: Integrative perspectives on the spectrum of spinocerebellar ataxias
    JJ de Vries, MJ da Costa Caiado… (2026)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/0aa50d82ac7d4e1bb43aa33a08b43adb/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2044862
    snippet: … in the RAB3A (Ras-… features, such as parkinsonism, dystonia, and chorea, are well described and reflect basal ganglia involvement. These symptoms may dominate the clinical picture …
    abstract: This review describes the clinically and genetically heterogenous group of 52 Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs). After a brief description of the epidemiology and clinical spectrum, this review highlights the functional neuroanatomy, the need for sufficient sampling based on this knowledge, and showcases examples of neuropathology. In addition, a comprehensive overview of the pathogenesis of the different forms of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) is given.

[3] Cargos and genes: insights into vesicular transport from inherited human disease
    P Gissen, ER Maher (2007)
    https://jmg.bmj.com/content/44/9/545.short
    snippet: … in Rab3a regulation are associated with neurodevelopmental defects. Mutations in the gene encoding Rab GDIa, which binds Rab3A, … progressive form of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA5, …
    abstract: Many cellular functions depend on the correct delivery of proteins to specific intracellular destinations. Mutations that alter protein structure and disrupt trafficking of the protein (the "cargo") occur in many genetic disorders. In addition, an increasing number of disorders have been linked to mutations in the genes encoding components of the vesicular transport machinery responsible for normal protein trafficking. We review the clinical phenotypes and molecular pathology of such inherited "protein-trafficking disorders", which provide seminal insights into the molecular mechanisms of protein trafficking. Further characterisation of this expanding group of disorders will provide a basis for developing new diagnostic techniques and treatment strategies and offer insights into the molecular pathology of common multifactorial diseases that have been linked to disordered trafficking mechanisms.

[4] Neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration associated with altered neurotransmission
    A Giannakopoulou (2017)
    https://www.termedia.pl/Neuronal-vacuolation-and-spinocerebellar-degeneration-associated-with-altered-neurotransmission,20,30152,0,1.html
    snippet: … ataxia and some clinical manifestations that recapitulate the … , the GTP-bound form of Rab3A accumulates in the brain and … This observation suggests that Rab3 GAP inactivates Rab3A …
    abstract: <i>Inherited neurodegenerative disorders are debilitating diseases that occur across different species, such as the domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris), and many are caused by mutations in the same genes as corresponding human conditions. In the present study, we report an inherited neurodegenerative condition, termed 'neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration' (NVSD) which affects neonatal or young dogs, mainly Rottweilers, which recently has been linked with the homozygosity for the RAB3GAP1:c.743delC allele. Mutations in human RAB3GAP1 cause Warburg micro syndrome (WARBM), a severe developmental disorder characterized predominantly by abnormalities of the nervous system including axonal peripheral neuropathy. RAB3GAP1 encodes the catalytic subunit of a GTPase activator protein and guanine exchange factor for Rab3 and Rab18 proteins, respectively. Rab proteins are involved in membrane trafficking in the endoplasmic reticulum, autophagy, axonal transport and synaptic transmission. The present study attempts to carry out a detailed histopathological examination of NVSD disease, extending from peripheral nerves to lower brain structures focusing on the neurotransmitter alterations noted in the cerebellum, the major structure affected. NVSD dogs presented with progressive cerebellar ataxia and some clinical manifestations that recapitulate the WARBM phenotype. Neuropathological examination revealed dystrophic axons, neurodegeneration and intracellular vacuolization in specific nuclei. In the cerebellum, severe vacuolation of cerebellar nuclei neurons, atrophy of Purkinje cells, and diminishing of GABAergic and glutamatergic fibres constitute the most striking lesions. The balance of evidence suggests that the neuropathological lesions are a reaction to the altered neurotransmission. The canine phenotype could serve as a model to delineate the disease-causing pathological mechanisms in RAB3GAP1 mutation. </i>.

[5] A Homozygous RAB3GAP1:c.743delC Mutation in Rottweilers with Neuronal Vacuolation and Spinocerebellar Degeneration
    T Mhlanga (2016)
    https://academic.oup.com/jvim/article-abstract/30/3/813/8452807
    snippet: … Overlapping ages of onset and clinical signs have made antemortem diagnosis difficult. … a Rab recycling protein and increased activated Rab3a in Purkinje cells which may contribute to …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>A variety of presumed hereditary, neurologic diseases have been reported in young Rottweilers. Overlapping ages of onset and clinical signs have made antemortem diagnosis difficult. One of these diseases, neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration (NVSD) shares clinical and histological features with polyneuropathy with ocular abnormalities and neuronal vacuolation (POANV), a recently described hereditary disease in Black Russian Terriers (BRTs). Dogs with POANV harbor mutations in RAB3GAP1 which codes for a protein involved in membrane trafficking.<h4>Hypothesis</h4>Rottweilers with NVSD will be homozygous for the RAB3GAP1:c.743delC allele associated with POANV in BRTs.<h4>Animals</h4>Eight Rottweilers with NVSD confirmed at necropsy, 128 Rottweilers without early onset neurologic signs, and 468 randomly selected dogs from 169 other breeds.<h4>Methods</h4>Retrospective case-control study. Dogs were genotyped for the RAB3GAP1:c.743delC allele with an allelic discrimination assay.<h4>Results</h4>All 8 NVSD-affected dogs were homozygous for the RAB3GAP1:c.743delC allele while the 128 NVSD-free Rottweilers were either homozygous for the reference allele (n = 105) or heterozygous (n = 23) and the 468 genotyped dogs from other breeds were all homozygous for the reference allele.<h4>Conclusions and clinical importance</h4>The RAB3GAP1:c.743delC mutation is associated with a similar phenotype in Rottweilers and BRTs. Identification of the mutation permits a DNA test that can aid in the diagnosis of NVSD and identify carriers of the trait so that breeders can avoid producing affected dogs. Disruption of membrane trafficking could explain the neuronal vacuolation seen in NVSD and other spongiform encephalopathies.

[6] An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.07.16.25330541v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.07.16.25330541v1.full-text
    snippet: Furthermore, we screened 320 patients with spinocerebellar ataxia for RAB3A variants using amplicon sequencing and identified the same c.

[7] Ataxia: Dominant
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/ataxia/domatax.html
    snippet: ... RAB3A: 19p13. SLC1A3; 5p13. SCA: Differential features, Dominant ... ATXN7 > 12 CAG repeats: Earlier disease onset. Allelic disorders. Spinocerebellar ataxia ...

[8] A Case of Cerebellar Ataxia due to RAB3A Variant (P5- ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1212/WNL.0000000000216479 https://www.neurology.org/doi/10.1212/WNL.0000000000216479
    snippet: From Unknown to Pathogenic: A Case of Cerebellar Ataxia due to RAB3A Variant (P5-16.001) ... Patient With Early-Onset Spinocerebellar Ataxia.

[9] An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41492970 DOI:10.1093/hmg/ddaf186 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41492970/
    snippet: by R Miyamoto · 2026 — These findings ... Keywords: RAB3A; neurodevelopmental disorders; parallel fiber; spinocerebellar ataxia; synaptic vesicle trafficking.
    abstract: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders caused by pathogenic variants in more than 40 genes with diverse cellular functions. In this study, we identified the c.247C > T p.(Arg83Trp) variant in RAB3A, encoding a small GTPase involved in membrane-associated regulated exocytosis, in two families with cerebellar ataxia. Affected individuals presented with adult-onset, gradually progressive cerebellar symptoms, often accompanied by mild gait spasticity and tremors. Variable features of neurodevelopmental disorders were also observed. Brain MRI consistently revealed cerebellar atrophy, often accentuated in the vermis, and neuropathological examinations demonstrated diffuse cerebellar cortical degeneration. Functionally, the R83W mutation lies within the conserved switch II region of Rab3A, a domain critical for effector interaction. Although the mutant Rab3A R83W retained GTP-binding affinity, it failed to bind the key effector proteins RIM1 and Rabphilin-3A, highlighting the functional importance of R83 in effector complex formation, as supported by structural analysis. In PC12 cells, the R83W mutant exhibited diffuse cytoplasmic localization, in contrast to the vesicle- and neurite-tip localization of the wild-type and GTP-bound Rab3A mutant. The concordant localization pattern of R83W and GDP-bound Rab3A mutants suggests that R83W-induced mislocalization results from a failure to engage downstream effector proteins. In the cerebellum, Rab3A was predominantly localized to parallel fiber terminals and was absent from postsynaptic Purkinje cells. These findings suggest that disruption of the interaction between Rab3A and its effector proteins may underlie disease pathogenesis, possibly involving presynaptic dysfunction at parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses mediated by the Rab3A-RIM1 complex.

[10] SCA28, a novel form of autosomal dominant... : Brain
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ovid.com/00002423-200601000-00023
    snippet: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1: clinical and neurophysiological characteristics in German kindreds. ... An R83W mutation in Rab3A causes autosomal-dominant ...