SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] AP-4 regulates neuronal lysosome composition, function, and transport via regulating export of critical lysosome receptor proteins at the trans-Golgi network
    P Majumder, D Edmison, C Rodger, S Patel… (2022)
    DOI:10.1091/mbc.E21-09-0473 https://www.molbiolcell.org/doi/abs/10.1091/mbc.E21-09-0473
    snippet: … a complex form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) with … -positive organelles as well as MAPK8IP3/JIP3, a neuronally … (and a potential interactor of MAPK8IP3) to the organelles. In …
    abstract: The adaptor protein complex-4 or AP-4 is known to mediate autophagosome maturation through regulating sorting of transmembrane cargo such as ATG9A at the Golgi. There is a need to understand AP-4 function in neurons, as mutations in any of its four subunits cause a complex form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) with intellectual disability. While AP-4 has been implicated in regulating trafficking and distribution of cargo such as ATG9A and APP, little is known about its effect on neuronal lysosomal protein traffic, lysosome biogenesis, and function. In this study, we demonstrate that in human iPSC-derived neurons AP-4 regulates lysosome composition, function, and transport via regulating the export of critical lysosomal receptors, including Sortilin 1, from the trans-Golgi network to endo-lysosomes. Additionally, loss of AP-4 causes endo-lysosomes to stall and build up in axonal swellings potentially through reduced recruitment of retrograde transport machinery to the organelle. These findings of axonal lysosome buildup are highly reminiscent of those observed in Alzheimer's disease as well as in neurons modeling the most common form of HSP, caused by <i>spastin</i> mutations. Our findings implicate AP-4 as a critical regulator of neuronal lysosome biogenesis and altered lysosome function and axonal endo-lysosome transport as an underlying defect in AP-4-deficient HSP. Additionally, our results also demonstrate the utility of the human i<sup>3</sup>Neuronal model system in investigating neuronal phenotypes observed in AP-4-deficient mice and/or the human AP-4 deficiency syndrome.

[2] De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual disability with variable brain anomalies
    K Platzer, H Sticht, SL Edwards, W Allen… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(18)30459-2
    snippet: … All individuals harbor de novo truncating or missense variants in MAPK8IP3; this represents … diseases, for example hereditary spastic paraplegia, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, …
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[3] Copy number variations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: piecing the mosaic tiles together through a systems biology approach
    G Morello, M Guarnaccia, AG Spampinato… (2018)
    PMID:28120152 DOI:10.1007/s12035-017-0393-x https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12035-017-0393-x
    snippet: … the generation of altered or truncated transcripts as well as the disrup… MAPK8IP3 encodes a protein that binds and regulates the … Increased levels of MAPK8IP3 seem to be required for …
    abstract: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating and still untreatable motor neuron disease. Despite the molecular mechanisms underlying ALS pathogenesis that are still far from being understood, several studies have suggested the importance of a genetic contribution in both familial and sporadic forms of the disease. In addition to single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which account for only a limited number of ALS cases, a consistent number of common and rare copy number variations (CNVs) have been associated to ALS. Most of the CNV-based association studies use a traditional candidate-gene approach that is inadequate for uncovering the genetic architectures of complex traits like ALS. The emergent paradigm of "systems biology" may offer a new perspective to better interpret the wide spectrum of CNVs in ALS, enabling the characterization of the complex network of gene products underlying ALS pathogenesis. In this review, we will explore the landscape of CNVs in ALS, putting specific emphasis on the functional impact of common CNV regions and genes consistently associated with increased risk of developing disease. In addition, we will discuss the potential contribution of multiple rare CNVs in ALS pathogenesis, focusing our attention on the complex mechanisms by which these proteins might impact, individually or in combination, the genetic susceptibility of ALS. The comprehensive detection and functional characterization of common and rare candidate risk CNVs in ALS susceptibility may bring new pieces into the intricate mosaic of ALS pathogenesis, providing interesting and important implications for a more precise molecular biomarker-assisted diagnosis and more effective and personalized treatments.

[4] The evolving spectrum of complex inherited neuropathies
    AM Rossor, S Haddad… (2024)
    PMC11377048 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11377048/
    snippet: … recessive spastic paraplegia type 79 (… one truncating variant and one pentanucleotide expansion. This study also demonstrates a redution in RFC1 levels in association with truncating …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose of review</h4>Inherited peripheral neuropathies can be divided into those diseases in which peripheral neuropathy is the sole or main feature of the disease (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease) and those in which peripheral neuropathy is just one feature of a more complex syndrome. In recent years there has been a substantial expansion in the number of genes associated with complex neuropathy syndromes.<h4>Recent findings</h4>This review will focus on emerging themes in this group of diseases, namely the increasing number of diseases due to repeat expansions; the emergence of both recessive and dominant negative alleles in the same gene producing a common phenotype and diseases in which there is selective loss of the allele from haematopoietic stem cells making genetic diagnosis on blood derived DNA problematic.<h4>Summary</h4>In this review we provide a practical approach to investigating and diagnosing patients with peripheral neuropathy as part of a complex syndrome and provide an updated table of the genes associated with this group of diseases.

[5] Engine breakdown of lysosomes and related organelles and the resulting physiology
    N Bakker, MLM Jongsma, J Neefjes (2025)
    DOI:10.3389/fcell.2025.1575571/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/cell-and-developmental-biology/articles/10.3389/fcell.2025.1575571/full
    snippet: … Elegans showed that mutations in the neuronal expressed MAPK8IP3 gene (encoding the homologue of mammalian JIP3) results in disturbed LE/Lys trafficking associated to NEDBA (…

[6] De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual Disability ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC6369540 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6369540/
    snippet: by K Platzer · 2019 · Cited by 84 — All individuals harbor de novo truncating or missense variants in MAPK8IP3 ... spastic paraplegia, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease ...
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[7] Recurrent de novo MAPK8IP3 variants cause neurological ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc855efac9c629acca828a40d3b2f8eff841d25e
    snippet: MAPK8IP3-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder: Case Report and Therapeutic Rationale for a Truncating Variant ... spastic paraplegia (SPG10). E. ReidMarko Kloos +9 ...
    abstract: c-Jun-amino-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3 (JIP3), encoded by MAPK8IP3, is an adaptor protein of the kinesin-1 complex and essential for axonal transport in neurons. However, an association between MAPK8IP3 variants and human disease has not been established. We identified 5 individuals from four families with recurrent de novo variants c.1732C>T (p.Arg578Cys) and c.3436C>T (p.Arg1146Cys) in MAPK8IP3. The core phenotype includes spastic diplegia, intellectual disability, cerebral atrophy, and corpus callosum hypoplasia. Zebrafish embryos overexpressing human mutant JIP3 showed axon varicosities of the posterior lateral line nerve, suggesting an adverse effect on the developing axons. Our results suggest that MAPK8IP3 variants cause a neurodevelopmental disease. ANN NEUROL 2019;85:927-933.

[8] Recurrent de novo MAPK8IP3 variants cause neurological ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332196295_Recurrent_de_novo_MAPK8IP3_variants_cause_neurological_phenotypes
    snippet: ropathy, and spastic paraplegia ... MAPK8IP3-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder: Case Report and Therapeutic Rationale for a Truncating Variant.
    abstract: c-Jun-amino-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3 (JIP3), encoded by MAPK8IP3, is an adaptor protein of the kinesin-1 complex and essential for axonal transport in neurons. However, an association between MAPK8IP3 variants and human disease has not been established. We identified 5 individuals from four families with recurrent de novo variants c.1732C>T (p.Arg578Cys) and c.3436C>T (p.Arg1146Cys) in MAPK8IP3. The core phenotype includes spastic diplegia, intellectual disability, cerebral atrophy, and corpus callosum hypoplasia. Zebrafish embryos overexpressing human mutant JIP3 showed axon varicosities of the posterior lateral line nerve, suggesting an adverse effect on the developing axons. Our results suggest that MAPK8IP3 variants cause a neurodevelopmental disease. ANN NEUROL 2019;85:927-933.

[9] Gene: CCDC82 (Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/317/gene/CCDC82/
    snippet: MAPK8IP3 1 · MARS2 2 · MED27 1 · MTRFR 1 · NFU1 2 · NIPA1 1 ... Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia. Gene: CCDC82. Green ... WES identified 3 homozgyous truncating ...

[10] Gene: MAPK8IP3 (Malformations of cortical development)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/96/gene/MAPK8IP3/
    snippet: Hereditary spastic paraplegia, childhood onset · Malformations of cortical ... gene: MAPK8IP3 was added gene: MAPK8IP3 was added to Malformations of cortical ...