SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6‐2‐related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, M Alsagob, K Kloth… (2020)
    DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ene.14082
    snippet: … variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation … NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[2] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies—Unravelling myelin biology
    NI Wolf, C Ffrench (2021)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41582-020-00432-1
    snippet: … -associated hypomyelination, some patients have severe epilepsy, … of NKX6-2-related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination. Eur. J. … Expanding the clinical and genetic spectra of NKX6-2-…
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies constitute a subset of genetic white matter disorders characterized by a primary lack of myelin deposition. Most patients with severe hypomyelination present in infancy or early childhood and develop severe neurological deficits, but the clinical presentation can also be mild with onset of symptoms in adolescence or adulthood. MRI can be used to visualize the process of myelination in detail, and MRI pattern recognition can provide a clinical diagnosis in many patients. Next-generation sequencing provides a definitive diagnosis in 80-90% of patients. Genes associated with hypomyelination include those that encode structural myelin proteins but also many that encode proteins involved in RNA translation and some lysosomal proteins. The precise pathomechanisms remain to be elucidated. Improved understanding of the process of myelination, the metabolic axonal support functions of myelin and the proposed contribution of myelin to CNS plasticity provide possible explanations as to why almost all patients with hypomyelination experience slow clinical decline after a long phase of stability. In this Review, we provide an overview of the hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, the advances in our understanding of myelin biology and of the genes involved in these disorders, and the insights these advances have provided into their clinical presentations and evolution.

[3] NKX6-2-related disorder
    V Chelban, N Kaya, F Alkuraya, H Houlden (2018)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk531509/
    snippet: … diffuse central nervous system hypomyelination. At the severe … by slowly progressive complex spastic ataxia with pyramidal … signal suggestive of hypomyelination observed in areas …

[4] Mutational analysis of abcd1 in 86 adrenoleukodystrophy patients, including identification of complex mutations
    T Matsukawa, J Mitsui, H Ishiura… (2017)
    https://www.jns-journal.com/article/S0022-510X(17)30963-2/abstract
    snippet: … three families of different ethnic background with an earlyonset spastic-ataxia phenotype. … presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. NKX6-2 is a transcriptional repressor with …

[5] A diagnostic approach to spastic ataxia syndromes
    JL Pedroso, TC Vale, MC França Junior, MA Kauffman… (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/s12311-021-01345-5 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12311-021-01345-5
    snippet: … Patients with pathogenic variants in NKX6–2 gene develop autosomal recessive spastic ataxia with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy. [33, 34]. Kinesin Family Member 1C (KIF1C) …
    abstract: Spastic ataxia is characterized by the combination of cerebellar ataxia with spasticity and other pyramidal features. It is the hallmark of some hereditary ataxias, but it can also occur in some spastic paraplegias and acquired conditions. It often presents with heterogenous clinical features with other neurologic and non-neurological symptoms, resulting in complex phenotypes. In this review, the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxias are discussed and classified in accordance with inheritance. Establishing an organized classification method based on mode inheritance is fundamental for the approach to patients with these syndromes. For each differential, the clinical features, neuroimaging and genetic aspects are reviewed. A diagnostic approach for spastic ataxias is then proposed.

[6] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2 ... - PubMed
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31509304/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2020 · Cited by 34 — ... epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination ... Keywords: NKX6-2; SPAX8; hypomyelination; leukodystrophy; spastic ataxia 8.
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[7] Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30196-9
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 65 — Mutations in NKX6-2 Cause Progressive Spastic Ataxia and Hypomyelination ... epilepsy, cognitive decline, dystonia, and hypomyelination on MRI.
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[8] NKX6-2-Related Disorder - GeneReviews® - NCBI Bookshelf
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK531509/
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2018 · Cited by 10 — Table 4. Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with NKX6-2-Related Spastic Ataxia with Hypomyelination ... epilepsy, see Epilepsy Foundation ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>NKX6-2-related disorder is characterized by a spectrum of progressive neurologic manifestations resulting from diffuse central nervous system hypomyelination. At the severe end of the spectrum is neonatal-onset nystagmus, severe spastic tetraplegia with joint contractures and scoliosis, and visual and hearing impairment, all of which rapidly progress resulting in death in early childhood. At the milder end of the spectrum is normal achievement of early motor milestones in the first year of life followed by slowly progressive complex spastic ataxia with pyramidal findings (spasticity with increased muscle tone and difficulty with gait and fine motor coordination) and cerebellar findings (nystagmus, extraocular movement disorder, dysarthria, titubation, and ataxia) with loss of developmental milestones. To date NKX6-2-related disorder has been reported in 25 individuals from 13 families.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of NKX6-2-related disorder is established in a proband with typical clinical and neuroimaging findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and typically involves a multidisciplinary team of specialists in the areas of developmental pediatrics, neurology, pediatric rehabilitation, orthopedics, PT/OT, social work, nutrition, pulmonary/sleep medicine, ophthalmology, audiology, and palliative care. Surveillance: Sleep studies for evidence of apnea. Routine assessment of: nutritional status and safety of oral intake; development; progression of spasticity and contractures.<h4>Genetic counseling</h4>NKX6-2-related disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the NKX6-2 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

[9] Mutations in nkx6-2 cause progressive spastic-ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.jns-journal.com/article/S0022-510X(17)30964-4/fulltext
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2017 · Cited by 65 — Mutations in nkx6-2 cause progressive spastic-ataxia and hypomyelination. V. Chelban. V. Chelban. Affiliations. University College London ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[10] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2-related ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://europepmc.org/article/pmc/6946857
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2019 · Cited by 32 — Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2-related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination. ... epilepsy surgery specimen studies 7 ...
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.