SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … identical homozygous VPS36 missense variant (NM_016075.… existence of FILIP1-related arthrogryposis with microcephaly, … also exhibit other phenotypes (microcephaly, sensorineural …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[2] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the … that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a … and cause a similar arthrogryposis phenotype in our cohort, it …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[3] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2022)
    https://europepmc.org/article/ppr/ppr556969
    snippet: … , microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 … The phenotypic analysis of our cohort highlights that the most …
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[4] The 2025 version of the gene table of neuromuscular disorders (nuclear genome)
    L Benarroch, G Bonne, F Rivier… (2025)
    https://www.nmd-journal.com/article/S0960-8966(24)01757-7/abstract
    snippet: … A given gene may be involved in several different clinical entities (phenotypic heterogeneity such as in LMNA defects) and conversely a given clinical entity may be produced by a …

[5] Microtubule plus-end tracking proteins in neuronal development
    D van de Willige, CC Hoogenraad… (2016)
    PMID:26969328 DOI:10.1007/s00018-016-2168-3 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00018-016-2168-3
    snippet: … processes in cultured neurons, the phenotypes of CLIP-115 and CLIP-… phenotypes [84, 85]. The loss of CLIP-190, the Drosophila homologue of CLIP-170, causes no strong phenotype …
    abstract: Regulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton is of pivotal importance for neuronal development and function. One such regulatory mechanism centers on microtubule plus-end tracking proteins (+TIPs): structurally and functionally diverse regulatory factors, which can form complex macromolecular assemblies at the growing microtubule plus-ends. +TIPs modulate important properties of microtubules including their dynamics and their ability to control cell polarity, membrane transport and signaling. Several neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases are associated with mutations in +TIPs or with misregulation of these proteins. In this review, we focus on the role and regulation of +TIPs in neuronal development and associated disorders.

[6] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10060356 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10060356/
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 are not observed in ... FILIP1 gene cause a novel autosomal recessive arthrogryposis phenotype with microcephaly.
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[7] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/364502352_Homozygous_loss-of-function_variants_in_FILIP1_cause_autosomal_recessive_arthrogryposis_multiplex_congenita
    snippet: ... microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[8] Gene: CUL1 (Microcephaly)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/138/gene/CUL1/
    snippet: FILIP1 2 · FLVCR1 2 · FOXG1 1 · FRA10AC1 1 · GABRB2 1 ... Microcephaly. Gene: CUL1. Green List (high evidence) ... Pan-neural overexpression of some missense and ...

[9] Gene: CHKA (Severe microcephaly)
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:35202461 DOI:10.1093/brain/awac074 https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/162/gene/CHKA/
    snippet: FILIP1 1 · GPKOW 4 · KBTBD2 1 · LHX2 1 · LRRC8C 1 · MCM7 1 ... Severe microcephaly. Gene: CHKA. Green List (high ... Klöckner (2022 - PMID: 35202461) describe the ...
    abstract: The Kennedy pathways catalyse the de novo synthesis of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, the most abundant components of eukaryotic cell membranes. In recent years, these pathways have moved into clinical focus because four of ten genes involved have been associated with a range of autosomal recessive rare diseases such as a neurodevelopmental disorder with muscular dystrophy (CHKB), bone abnormalities and cone-rod dystrophy (PCYT1A) and spastic paraplegia (PCYT2, SELENOI). We identified six individuals from five families with bi-allelic variants in CHKA presenting with severe global developmental delay, epilepsy, movement disorders and microcephaly. Using structural molecular modelling and functional testing of the variants in a cell-based Saccharomyces cerevisiae model, we determined that these variants reduce the enzymatic activity of CHKA and confer a significant impairment of the first enzymatic step of the Kennedy pathway. In summary, we present CHKA as a novel autosomal recessive gene for a neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy and microcephaly.

[10] Yun Li - Scholar
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.bohrium.com/scholar/qx5182479/Yun_Li
    snippet: Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Homozygous loss-of-function ...