SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome: expanding the clinical and molecular phenotype
    B Isidor, F Ebstein, A Hurst, M Vincent, I Bader… (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360021041320
    snippet: … malformations, defined as Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS). Investigations showed that pathogenic variants in PSMD12 … anomalies, we also confirmed preaxial hand abnormalities …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12 has been reported in individuals with neurodevelopmental phenotypes, including developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), facial dysmorphism, and congenital malformations, defined as Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS). Investigations showed that pathogenic variants in PSMD12 perturb intracellular protein homeostasis. Our objective was to further explore the clinical and molecular phenotypic spectrum of STISS.<h4>Methods</h4>We report 24 additional unrelated patients with STISS with various truncating single nucleotide variants or copy-number variant deletions involving PSMD12. We explore disease etiology by assessing patient cells and CRISPR/Cas9-engineered cell clones for various cellular pathways and inflammatory status.<h4>Results</h4>The expressivity of most clinical features in STISS is highly variable. In addition to previously reported DD/ID, speech delay, cardiac and renal anomalies, we also confirmed preaxial hand abnormalities as a feature of this syndrome. Of note, 2 patients also showed chilblains resembling signs observed in interferonopathy. Remarkably, our data show that STISS patient cells exhibit a profound remodeling of the mTORC1 and mitophagy pathways with an induction of type I interferon-stimulated genes.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We refine the phenotype of STISS and show that it can be clinically recognizable and biochemically diagnosed by a type I interferon gene signature.

[2] Interpretable clinical genomics with a likelihood ratio paradigm
    PN Robinson, V Ravanmehr, JOB Jacobsen… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30230-5
    snippet: … annotating the set of phenotypic abnormalities observed in the individual being … abnormalities to assess candidate diseases by searching diseases with similar phenotypic abnormalities …
    abstract: Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)-based analysis has become standard for genomic diagnostics of rare diseases. Current algorithms use a variety of semantic and statistical approaches to prioritize the typically long lists of genes with candidate pathogenic variants. These algorithms do not provide robust estimates of the strength of the predictions beyond the placement in a ranked list, nor do they provide measures of how much any individual phenotypic observation has contributed to the prioritization result. However, given that the overall success rate of genomic diagnostics is only around 25%-50% or less in many cohorts, a good ranking cannot be taken to imply that the gene or disease at rank one is necessarily a good candidate. Here, we present an approach to genomic diagnostics that exploits the likelihood ratio (LR) framework to provide an estimate of (1) the posttest probability of candidate diagnoses, (2) the LR for each observed HPO phenotype, and (3) the predicted pathogenicity of observed genotypes. LIkelihood Ratio Interpretation of Clinical AbnormaLities (LIRICAL) placed the correct diagnosis within the first three ranks in 92.9% of 384 case reports comprising 262 Mendelian diseases, and the correct diagnosis had a mean posttest probability of 67.3%. Simulations show that LIRICAL is robust to many typically encountered forms of genomic and phenomic noise. In summary, LIRICAL provides accurate, clinically interpretable results for phenotype-driven genomic diagnostics.

[3] Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/am/pii/S1098360021041320
    snippet: by B Isidor · 2022 · Cited by 26 — Interestingly, we validated the preaxial hand malformations (i.e. thumb malformations), ... PSMD12- associated neurodevelopmental disorder. Our study also ...
    abstract: Alteration in the ubiquitin-proteasome system results in human disorders with neurological and/or autoinflammatory presentation. Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms, with or without other congenital anomalies, and autoinflammation. We described six patients (four adults) from two unrelated families carrying a known p.(Arg289*) or a novel p.(Tyr111*) PSMD12 variant. Portraying a completely penetrant condition with inter- and intra-familiar clinical variability, all individuals presented with developmental delay, intellectual disability, craniofacial, and skeletal anomalies. Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic fingernail, cholesteatoma, oligodontia, and the occurrence of an ovarian teratoma. Most subjects had acne, short stature, and developed obesity since late childhood. Eating behavior was reported. Good sociality and behavioral concern emerged as well. None presented clinical manifestations of autoinflammation and the detected IFN-I signature perturbations were not specific. Together with a complete literature review, we expanded the clinical spectrum of STISS, highlighting the relevance of inherited variants, and discussing challenges in diagnosis and management. We finally consider the intriguing role of PSMD12 in human development and propose to index "onychoheterotopia" among the Human Phenotype Ontology terms.

[4] Interpretable Clinical Genomics with a Likelihood Ratio ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:28132691 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.021/attachment/7574984e-81ad-435a-ab13-4d354f016181/mmc1.pdf https://www.cell.com/cms/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.021/attachment/7574984e-81ad-435a-ab13-4d354f016181/mmc1.pdf
    snippet: Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome. PSMD12. Subject 3. 12. PMID:28132691. Arthrogryposis ... Temtamy Preaxial Brachydactyly syndrome. CHSY1. IV-1. 16. PMID:24269551.
    abstract: Degradation of proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is an essential biological process in the development of eukaryotic organisms. Dysregulation of this mechanism leads to numerous human neurodegenerative or neurodevelopmental disorders. Through a multi-center collaboration, we identified six de novo genomic deletions and four de novo point mutations involving PSMD12, encoding the non-ATPase subunit PSMD12 (aka RPN5) of the 19S regulator of 26S proteasome complex, in unrelated individuals with intellectual disability, congenital malformations, ophthalmologic anomalies, feeding difficulties, deafness, and subtle dysmorphic facial features. We observed reduced PSMD12 levels and an accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins without any impairment of proteasome catalytic activity. Our PSMD12 loss-of-function zebrafish CRISPR/Cas9 model exhibited microcephaly, decreased convolution of the renal tubules, and abnormal craniofacial morphology. Our data support the biological importance of PSMD12 as a scaffolding subunit in proteasome function during development and neurogenesis in particular; they enable the definition of a neurodevelopmental disorder due to PSMD12 variants, expanding the phenotypic spectrum of UPS-dependent disorders.

[5] Does It Run in Your Family? Inherited Truncating  PSMD12  Variants Broaden the Phenotypic Spectrum of Stankiewicz‐Isidor Syndrome
    A Feresin, B Spedicati, S Zampieri… (2025)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63953 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63953
    snippet: … anomalies in PSMD12- related spectrum, we finally propose to index the term among the ontology of human phenotypic abnormalities. … hand anomalies, and unilateral polydactyly were …
    abstract: Alteration in the ubiquitin-proteasome system results in human disorders with neurological and/or autoinflammatory presentation. Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms, with or without other congenital anomalies, and autoinflammation. We described six patients (four adults) from two unrelated families carrying a known p.(Arg289*) or a novel p.(Tyr111*) PSMD12 variant. Portraying a completely penetrant condition with inter- and intra-familiar clinical variability, all individuals presented with developmental delay, intellectual disability, craniofacial, and skeletal anomalies. Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic fingernail, cholesteatoma, oligodontia, and the occurrence of an ovarian teratoma. Most subjects had acne, short stature, and developed obesity since late childhood. Eating behavior was reported. Good sociality and behavioral concern emerged as well. None presented clinical manifestations of autoinflammation and the detected IFN-I signature perturbations were not specific. Together with a complete literature review, we expanded the clinical spectrum of STISS, highlighting the relevance of inherited variants, and discussing challenges in diagnosis and management. We finally consider the intriguing role of PSMD12 in human development and propose to index "onychoheterotopia" among the Human Phenotype Ontology terms.

[6] Stankiewicz-Isidor Syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/stankiewicz_isidor_syndrome
    snippet: A neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, behavioral disorders, mild dysmorphism, ophthalmologic ...
    abstract: Alteration in the ubiquitin-proteasome system results in human disorders with neurological and/or autoinflammatory presentation. Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms, with or without other congenital anomalies, and autoinflammation. We described six patients (four adults) from two unrelated families carrying a known p.(Arg289*) or a novel p.(Tyr111*) PSMD12 variant. Portraying a completely penetrant condition with inter- and intra-familiar clinical variability, all individuals presented with developmental delay, intellectual disability, craniofacial, and skeletal anomalies. Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic fingernail, cholesteatoma, oligodontia, and the occurrence of an ovarian teratoma. Most subjects had acne, short stature, and developed obesity since late childhood. Eating behavior was reported. Good sociality and behavioral concern emerged as well. None presented clinical manifestations of autoinflammation and the detected IFN-I signature perturbations were not specific. Together with a complete literature review, we expanded the clinical spectrum of STISS, highlighting the relevance of inherited variants, and discussing challenges in diagnosis and management. We finally consider the intriguing role of PSMD12 in human development and propose to index "onychoheterotopia" among the Human Phenotype Ontology terms.

[7] Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome: expanding the clinical and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34906456/
    snippet: by B Isidor · 2022 · Cited by 26 — PSMD12 has been reported in individuals with neurodevelopmental phenotypes, facial dysmorphism, and congenital malformations, defined as Stankiewicz-Isidor ...
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12 has been reported in individuals with neurodevelopmental phenotypes, including developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), facial dysmorphism, and congenital malformations, defined as Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS). Investigations showed that pathogenic variants in PSMD12 perturb intracellular protein homeostasis. Our objective was to further explore the clinical and molecular phenotypic spectrum of STISS.<h4>Methods</h4>We report 24 additional unrelated patients with STISS with various truncating single nucleotide variants or copy-number variant deletions involving PSMD12. We explore disease etiology by assessing patient cells and CRISPR/Cas9-engineered cell clones for various cellular pathways and inflammatory status.<h4>Results</h4>The expressivity of most clinical features in STISS is highly variable. In addition to previously reported DD/ID, speech delay, cardiac and renal anomalies, we also confirmed preaxial hand abnormalities as a feature of this syndrome. Of note, 2 patients also showed chilblains resembling signs observed in interferonopathy. Remarkably, our data show that STISS patient cells exhibit a profound remodeling of the mTORC1 and mitophagy pathways with an induction of type I interferon-stimulated genes.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We refine the phenotype of STISS and show that it can be clinically recognizable and biochemically diagnosed by a type I interferon gene signature.

[8] 617516 - STANKIEWICZ-ISIDOR SYNDROME; STISS
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/617516
    snippet: Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, ...

[9] PSMD12
    (authors not shown)
    https://humandiseasegenes.nl/psmd12
    snippet: The syndrome caused by point disrupting mutations or deletions of the PSMD12 gene is called Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (OMIM # 617516).