SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] MSL2 ensures biallelic gene expression in mammals
    Y Sun, M Wiese, R Hmadi, R Karayol, J Seyfferth… (2023)
    PMID:38030723 DOI:10.1038/s41586-023-06781-3 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06781-3
    snippet: … , histone modifications, such as H4K16ac, which is added by … associated with Dias–Logan syndrome, resulting in variable … of the indicated factors and histone acetylation at the TSS and …
    abstract: In diploid organisms, biallelic gene expression enables the production of adequate levels of mRNA<sup>1,2</sup>. This is essential for haploinsufficient genes, which require biallelic expression for optimal function to prevent the onset of developmental disorders<sup>1,3</sup>. Whether and how a biallelic or monoallelic state is determined in a cell-type-specific manner at individual loci remains unclear. MSL2 is known for dosage compensation of the male X chromosome in flies. Here we identify a role of MSL2 in regulating allelic expression in mammals. Allele-specific bulk and single-cell analyses in mouse neural progenitor cells revealed that, in addition to the targets showing biallelic downregulation, a class of genes transitions from biallelic to monoallelic expression after MSL2 loss. Many of these genes are haploinsufficient. In the absence of MSL2, one allele remains active, retaining active histone modifications and transcription factor binding, whereas the other allele is silenced, exhibiting loss of promoter-enhancer contacts and the acquisition of DNA methylation. Msl2-knockout mice show perinatal lethality and heterogeneous phenotypes during embryonic development, supporting a role for MSL2 in regulating gene dosage. The role of MSL2 in preserving biallelic expression of specific dosage-sensitive genes sets the stage for further investigation of other factors that are involved in allelic dosage compensation in mammalian cells, with considerable implications for human disease.

[3] Homozygous Deletion of the Epigenetic Regulator PHF20 in Individuals With Neurodevelopmental Disorder
    SY Dagan, H Xuan, J Rips, E Paz (2025)
    DOI:10.1155/humu/6484814 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/humu/6484814
    snippet: … integrity and global histone H4 acetylation, we observed a spe… Finally, pathogenic variants in MSL2 lead to Karayol–Borroto… global H4K16ac levels were unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 …
    abstract: <i>PHF20</i> encodes plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20), a component of the KAT8-containing nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex that deposits acetylation on histone H4 to activate gene expression. We report two unrelated individuals with developmental delay, microcephaly, and distinctive facial features, in whom exome sequencing and chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> that segregated with the disease phenotype in their families. Breakpoint junction sequencing revealed an <i>Alu-Alu</i>-mediated deletion event. Western blot in cells from an affected individual showed undetectable PHF20, while levels of other NSL complex subunits were unaltered. Transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis revealed significant downregulation of gene pathways related to cell projection and neuronal development, associated with reduced histone H4K16 acetylation at these genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> leads to a neurodevelopmental syndrome, potentially through targeted epigenetic dysregulation and altered gene expression essential for neuronal development. Identifying additional families with biallelic <i>PHF20</i> variants will further delineate the phenotypic spectrum, and molecular studies in neuronal cell lines will be essential for understanding the disease mechanism.

[4] KAT8-mediated epigenetic modifications: Physiological functions, heterogeneity in disease, and advances in targeted development
    Z Wang, G Ren, P Gao (2026)
    PMID:42472105 DOI:10.1016/j.isci.2026.116680 https://www.cell.com/iscience/fulltext/S2589-0042(26)02056-0
    snippet: … catalyzing H4K16ac, is mainly responsible for the acetylation of non-histone proteins. … syndrome MSL2-associated neurodevelopmental syndrome (MANDS) without global H4K16ac …
    abstract: KAT8 (MOF/MYST1) is a core histone acetyltransferase of the MYST family. Beyond its canonical H4K16ac activity, KAT8 catalyzes diverse acylations and regulates stem cell biology, DNA repair, metabolism, and immunity. This review systematically integrates KAT8's regulatory networks across physiology and disease. We decipher the molecular basis of its context-dependent "double-edged sword" role in cancer, acting predominantly as an oncoprotein yet exhibiting tumor-suppressive functions under specific conditions. We evaluate current KAT8 inhibitor development, from early non-selective compounds to selective leads, and highlight persistent translational hurdles including insufficient specificity and limited <i>in vivo</i> efficacy. This work provides a comprehensive framework that clarifies recent controversies-such as whether H4K16ac primarily governs transcription or replication timing, and which KAT8-containing complex catalyzes, which acetylation mark-and establishes a rationale for future precision-targeting strategies and biomarker development grounded in KAT8 functional heterogeneity.

[5] Stage-specific epigenetic priming amplifies gene activation during lineage commitment
    …, W Deboutte, H Holz, M Shvedunova, R Karayol… (2026)
    DOI:10.1126/sciadv.adz8889 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.adz8889
    snippet: … H4K16 acetylation, the MSLc is specific for H4K16 acetylation … Furthermore, we analyzed H4K16ac levels in promoter … whereby it reduces both MSL2 and H4K16ac levels. Our study …
    abstract: Neural progenitor cells exhibit developmental plasticity as they can commit to distinct developmental trajectories. The male-specific lethal complex (MSLc) is linked to multiple developmental disorders, suggesting a role in neural fate commitment. To dissect MSLc function, we used a multipronged approach combining chronic and acute depletion models. Knockout of the MSLc scaffolding component MSL1 caused embryonic lethality by E10.5 (embryonic day 10.5), and single-cell multiomics revealed altered cell population composition across multiple germ layer-derived lineages, including neuroectoderm. Two-dimensional directed differentiation models showed that the MSLc facilitates accessibility at regulatory elements during early stages of neurogenesis. Neurodevelopmental genes displayed reduced enhancer-promoter contacts and failed to reach appropriate expression levels when the MSLc was absent early in neural differentiation. In contrast, MSLc loss at later stages did not recapitulate this phenotype, indicating that MSLc-mediated gene priming is a key mechanism enabling timely activation of lineage-specifying transcriptional programs.

[6] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7
    snippet: (C) Immunoblots of H4K16ac and Msl2 in lysates from brain cortical tissue of Msl2. ... Karayol R, Borroto MC, Haghshenas S et al (2024) MSL2 ...

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — ... H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Bulk reduction of H4K16 acetylation in patient cells a,...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Bulk-reduction-of-H4K16-acetylation-in-patient-cells-a-Immunohistochemistry-of-FFPE-skin_fig2_327702211
    snippet: ... H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon ...

[9] MSL2 - DECIPHER v11.38
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.deciphergenomics.org/gene/msl2/overview/clinical-info
    snippet: ... (H4K16ac), an epigenetic mark that prevents chromatin ... Gene/disease association. Gene2Phenotype. Monoallelic autosomal. MSL2-related developmental disorder ...

[10] MSL2 gene MSL Complex Subunit 2
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/MSL2
    snippet: ... MSL2 drives H4K16 acetylation and, through ... MSL2 include Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas Neurodevelopmental Syndrome and Complex Neurodevelopmental Disorder.