SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … , rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.…
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[2] Thickened Nuchal Translucency, Lymphangioma, and Ventriculomegaly: Prenatal Phenotypes for MSL2‐Related Disorders
    Q Xiang, J Wang, M Yang (2026)
    PMC13446537 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13446537/
    snippet: … novo recurrent MSL2 c.… MSL2 gene and disease phenotype [1]. Additionally, it identified this variant as de novo in four patients diagnosed with MSL2‐associated neurodevelopmental …

[3] Chromosome 3q22. 2‐q26. 2 Interstitial Deletion in a Patient With Wisconsin Syndrome, Blepharophimosis‐Ptosis‐Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome, Dandy‐Walker …
    P Prasun, S Henry… (2025)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.64138 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.64138
    snippet: … to be associated with autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental disorders. (Lehalle et al. … genes in the deleted region associated with neurodevelopmental disorders are RNF13 and …
    abstract: Wisconsin syndrome is a very rare genetic condition characterized by coarse facies, prominent nasal tip, bushy high arched/upsweeping eyebrows, and a full/everted lower lip. Deletion of chromosome 3q24q25 region is considered critical for its manifestation. Deletion of the adjoining chromosome region 3q24 is associated with Dandy-Walker malformation, while 3q22.3 deletion is associated with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome. Here, we report an individual with chromosome 3q22.2-q26.2 interstitial deletion presenting with Wisconsin syndrome, blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome, Dandy-Walker malformation, Pierre Robin sequence, global developmental delays, and recurrent infections. This is the largest contiguous gene deletion reported in this region, and the combination of clinical features seen in this individual has not been reported before. Additionally, we propose that STAG1 is a candidate gene for recurrent infections in addition to cognitive impairment.

[4] Basilicata-Akhtar Syndrome: Unraveling an Ultrarare Cause of Developmental Delay
    V Kulkarni, S Chalipat, A Gupta, A Bhosle, M Bahal… (2024)
    https://www.cureus.com/articles/278290-basilicata-akhtar-syndrome-unraveling-an-ultrarare-cause-of-developmental-delay.pdf
    snippet: … The core MSL complex in mammals comprises MSL1, MSL2, … discovered X-linked neurodevelopmental disease that is equally … Ventriculomegaly was detected during the prenatal …
    abstract: There is still more to learn about the etiology of extremely uncommon developmental disorders. A heterozygous or hemizygous pathogenic variation in male-specific lethal 3 (MSL3) causes the uncommon X-linked condition known as Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome, which is characterized by a global developmental delay that is evident from infancy, feeding difficulties, and muscle hypotonia. Thus far, over 40 cases have been documented. Here, we report the first case of Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome in India. A 3-year-old boy presented with global development delay. Physical examination revealed dysmorphism and hypotonia. After whole exome sequencing, exon 8 of the MSL3 gene on chromosome X showed evidence of a hemizygous single base pair deletion.

[5] Basilicata-Akhtar Syndrome: Unraveling an Ultrarare Cause of Developmental Delay
    K Vishwanath, C Shiji, A Gupta, B Akanksha, B Mridu (2024)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/a61075183bd7fda2d1c617d3c3fd1056/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2045583
    snippet: … The core MSL complex in mammals comprises MSL1, MSL2, … discovered X-linked neurodevelopmental disease that is equally … Ventriculomegaly was detected during the prenatal …
    abstract: There is still more to learn about the etiology of extremely uncommon developmental disorders. A heterozygous or hemizygous pathogenic variation in male-specific lethal 3 (MSL3) causes the uncommon X-linked condition known as Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome, which is characterized by a global developmental delay that is evident from infancy, feeding difficulties, and muscle hypotonia. Thus far, over 40 cases have been documented. Here, we report the first case of Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome in India. A 3-year-old boy presented with global development delay. Physical examination revealed dysmorphism and hypotonia. After whole exome sequencing, exon 8 of the MSL3 gene on chromosome X showed evidence of a hemizygous single base pair deletion.

[6] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12881215 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12881215/
    snippet: by O Zgheib · 2025 · Cited by 1 — Although both anomalies are known to cause neurodevelopmental disorders, ventriculomegaly has so far only been associated with MSL2 variants. These two ...
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[7] Prenatal diagnosis of MSL2‐related ventriculomegaly in ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://access.archive-ouverte.unige.ch/access/metadata/71bb44a0-127e-47bf-92c9-4384a3aa684e/download
    snippet: by O Zgheib · 2026 · Cited by 1 — Although both anom- alies are known to cause neurodevelopmental disorders, ventriculomegaly has so far only been associated with MSL2 variants.
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[8] (PDF) Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/395525778_Prenatal_Diagnosis_of_MSL2-Related_Ventriculomegaly_in_Association_With_an_Inherited_15q13_Microduplication
    snippet: ArticlePDF Available. Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly ... neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. ... ultrasound at 26 ...

[9] Prenatal Exome
    (authors not shown)
    https://read.qxmd.com/keyword/182629
    snippet: ... Ventriculomegaly: Prenatal Phenotypes for MSL2-Related Disorders. ... ultrasound. This ... The first prenatal diagnosis of EMC10-Related neurodevelopmental ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 encodes a member of the MSL complex, an epigenetic … MSL2 variants leading to a neurodevelopmental disorder … for this phenotype: the MSL2associated neurodevelopmental …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.