SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6‐2‐related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, M Alsagob, K Kloth… (2020)
    DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ene.14082
    snippet: … -2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels. … For comprehensive genotype–phenotype analyses, all reported genetically diagnosed …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[2] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies—Unravelling myelin biology
    NI Wolf, C Ffrench (2021)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41582-020-00432-1
    snippet: … beginning to understand genotype–phenotype relationships67,… of NKX6-2 underlie a severe hypomyelinating leukodystrophy… NKX6-2-related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination. Eur. J. …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies constitute a subset of genetic white matter disorders characterized by a primary lack of myelin deposition. Most patients with severe hypomyelination present in infancy or early childhood and develop severe neurological deficits, but the clinical presentation can also be mild with onset of symptoms in adolescence or adulthood. MRI can be used to visualize the process of myelination in detail, and MRI pattern recognition can provide a clinical diagnosis in many patients. Next-generation sequencing provides a definitive diagnosis in 80-90% of patients. Genes associated with hypomyelination include those that encode structural myelin proteins but also many that encode proteins involved in RNA translation and some lysosomal proteins. The precise pathomechanisms remain to be elucidated. Improved understanding of the process of myelination, the metabolic axonal support functions of myelin and the proposed contribution of myelin to CNS plasticity provide possible explanations as to why almost all patients with hypomyelination experience slow clinical decline after a long phase of stability. In this Review, we provide an overview of the hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, the advances in our understanding of myelin biology and of the genes involved in these disorders, and the insights these advances have provided into their clinical presentations and evolution.

[3] Expanding the clinical and neuroimaging features of NKX6-2-related hereditary spastic ataxia type 8
    AH Bereshneh, S Hosseipour… (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S176972121930744X
    snippet: … NKX6-2 gene causing autosomal recessive spastic ataxia type 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy … Although there is no evident genotype-phenotype correlation, however nonsense …
    abstract: Pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 gene causing autosomal recessive spastic ataxia type 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy have been reported in few families around the world. In this study, we performed Whole Exome Sequencing and identified a novel missense variant, c.501C > G; p.(Phe167Leu), in two affected siblings with main manifestations of global developmental delay, motor regression, hypotonia, clonus in lower limbs and muscle bulk atrophy especially in the upper limbs, spasticity and contracture, scoliosis, hip dislocation, oculomotor apraxia, horizontal and vertical nystagmus. In addition, wrist and foot drop due to peripheral axonal neuropathy were observed in these patients as a new clinical finding and cerebellar white matter involvement in brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) as new imaging finding. Therefore, we expanded the manifestations of NKX6-2-related disorders in this manuscript.

[4] Expanding the clinical and genetic spectra of NKX6‐2‐related disorder
    C Baldi, AM Bertoli‐Avella, N Al‐Sannaa… (2018)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.13221 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13221
    snippet: … different homozygous NKX6-2 variants, and describe in detail the clinical findings for 10 genetically confirmed patients. In order to define potential genotype-phenotype correlations, we …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) affect the white matter of the central nervous system and manifest as neurological disorders. They are genetically heterogeneous. Very recently, biallelic variants in NKX6-2 have been suggested to cause a novel form of autosomal recessive HLD. Using whole-exome or whole-genome sequencing, we identified the previously reported c.196delC and c.487C>G variants in NKX6-2 in 3 and 2 unrelated index cases, respectively; the novel c.608G>A variant was identified in a sixth patient. All variants were homozygous in affected family members only. Our patients share a primary diagnosis of psychomotor delay, and they show spastic quadriparesis, nystagmus and hypotonia. Seizures and dysmorphic features (observed in 2 families each) represent an addition to the phenotype, while developmental regression (observed in 3 families) appears to be a notable and previously underestimated clinical feature. Our findings extend the clinical and mutational spectra associated with this novel form of HLD. Comparative analysis of our 10 patients and the 15 reported previously did, however, not reveal clear evidence for a genotype-phenotype correlation.

[5] NKX6-2-related disorder
    V Chelban, N Kaya, F Alkuraya, H Houlden (2018)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk531509/
    snippet: … slowly progressive complex spastic ataxia with pyramidal findings (… hypomyelinating leukodystrophy multigene panel that includes … No clear genotype-phenotype correlations have …

[6] Natural history, biomarkers, and genetic characterisation of ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://ern-ithaca.eu/our-research-activities/calls-for-collaboration/natural-history-biomarkers-and-genetic-characterisation-of-autosomal-recessive-nkx6-2-related-spastic-ataxia-8-with-hypomyelinating-leukodystrophy/
    snippet: ... NKX6-2-related spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy. Natural ... In turn, this will accelerate our understanding of the genotype-phenotype ...

[7] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6-2-related ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://europepmc.org/article/pmc/6946857
    snippet: by V Chelban · 2019 · Cited by 32 — Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy. ... Genotype–phenotype ...
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[8] Mutations in NKX6-2 cause progressive spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, N Patel, J Vandrovcova, MN Zanetti… (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30196-9
    snippet: … with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe … or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. … same homozygous truncating variant in NKX6-2 fully segregated …
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[9] Viorica Chelban,* Nisha Patel, 2, 15 Jana Vandrovcova, M. Natalia Zanetti, 3 David S. Lynch, Mina Ryten, 9, 11 Juan A. Botıa, 9, 10 Oscar Bello, 3 Eloise …
    JE Rothman, FS Alkuraya, H Houlden (2017)
    https://iris.unime.it/retrieve/handle/11570/3133952/221414/NKX6.pdf
    snippet: … with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life … or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. … role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations …

[10] NKX6-2-Related Disorder Synonyms: NKX6-2-Related Spastic Ataxia with Hypomyelination, SPAX8
    MRI Brain
    https://europepmc.org/books/n/gene/nkx6-2-spax/?extid=20301578&src=med
    snippet: … , severe spastic tetraplegia with … Truncating variants can be located throughout NKX6-2 and lead to disease through a loss-of-function mechanism. All reported pathogenic missense …