SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic enhancement of limb defects in a mouse model of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    ME Lopez‐Burks, R Santos, S Kawauchi… (2016)
    PMID:27120109 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.c.31491 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.c.31491
    snippet: … Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is characterized by a wide variety of structural and … We hypothesized that further impairment of candidate pathways might produce limb defects …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is characterized by a wide variety of structural and functional abnormalities in almost every organ system of the body. CdLS is now known to be caused by mutations that disrupt the function of the cohesin complex or its regulators, and studies of animal models and cell lines tell us that the effect of these mutations is to produce subtle yet pervasive dysregulation of gene expression. With many hundreds of mostly small gene expression changes occurring in every cell type and tissue, identifying the etiology of any particular birth defect is very challenging. Here we focus on limb abnormalities, which are commonly seen in CdLS. In the limb buds of the Nipbl-haploinsufficient mouse (Nipbl(+/-) mouse), a model for the most common form of CdLS, modest gene expression changes are observed in several candidate pathways whose disruption is known to cause limb abnormalities, yet the limbs of Nipbl(+/-) mice develop relatively normally. We hypothesized that further impairment of candidate pathways might produce limb defects similar to those seen in CdLS, and performed genetic experiments to test this. Focusing on Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp), and Hox gene pathways, we show that decreasing Bmp or Hox function (but not Shh function) enhances polydactyly in Nipbl(+/-) mice, and in some cases produces novel skeletal phenotypes. However, frank limb reductions, as are seen in a subset of individuals with CdLS, do not occur, suggesting that additional signaling and/or gene regulatory pathways are involved in producing such dramatic changes. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[2] Advancing the clinical and molecular understanding of cornelia de lange syndrome: A multidisciplinary pediatric case series and review of the literature
    K Gruca (2024)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: … MAU2 interacts with the cohesin ring in the closed state, and its ATPase heads … , limb reduction abnormalities and the classic phenotype suggest a high likelihood of Cornelia de Lange …

[3] Microdeletions at 19p13. 11p12 in five individuals with neurodevelopmental delay
    M Rieger, S Moutton, S Verheyen, K Steindl… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721222002506
    snippet: … in MAU2 was considered pathogenic in an individual with Cornelia de Lange syndrome. … in one individual and the encompassment of MAU2 in three individuals' deletions suggest …

[4] Chung–Jansen syndrome can mimic Cornelia de Lange syndrome: Another player among chromatinopathies?
    B Conti, B Rinaldi, M Rimoldi, R Villa… (2023)
    PMID:36843271 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63164 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63164
    snippet: … Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare multisystem congenital neurodevelopmental … hirsutism, gastrointestinal abnormalities and upper limb reduction defects. CdLS syndrome is …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare multisystem congenital neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) characterized by distinctive facial anomalies, short stature, developmental delay, hirsutism, gastrointestinal abnormalities and upper limb reduction defects. CdLS syndrome is associated with causative variants in genes encoding for the cohesin complex, a cellular machinery involved in chromatid pairing, DNA repair and gene-expression regulation. In this report, we describe a familial case of a syndromic presentation in a 4-year-old patient (P1) and in his mother (P2). Trio-based Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) performed on P1 was first negative. Since his phenotypic evolution during the follow-up was reminiscent of the CdLS spectrum, a reanalysis of WES data, focused on CdLS-related genes, was requested. Although no alterations in those genes was detected, we identified the likely pathogenetic variant c.40G > A (p.Glu14Lys) in the PHIP gene, in the meanwhile associated with Chung-Jansen syndrome. Reverse phenotyping carried out in both patients confirmed the molecular diagnosis. CHUJANS belongs to NDDs, featuring developmental delay, mild-to-moderate intellectual disability, behavioral problems, obesity and facial dysmorphisms. Moreover, as here described, CHUJANS shows a significant overlap with the CdLS spectrum, with specific regard to facial gestalt. On the basis of our findings, we suggest to include PHIP among genes routinely analyzed in patients belonging to the CdLS spectrum.

[5] Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    MA Deardorff, SE Noon, ID Krantz (2020)
    PMID:20301283 https://europepmc.org/books/nbk1104/
    snippet: … life), hypertrichosis, and upper-limb reduction defects that range from subtle phalangeal … The regulatory proteins NIPBL and MAU2 play key roles in loading cohesin onto chromatin, …
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[6] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1104/
    snippet: by MA Deardorff · 2020 · Cited by 188 — Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects ... Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[7] Diagnosis and management of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-018-0031-0
    snippet: by AD Kline · 2018 · Cited by 527 — Cornelia de Lange ... Individuals with truncating NIPBL variants have been reported to particularly have major limb defects.
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is an archetypical genetic syndrome that is characterized by intellectual disability, well-defined facial features, upper limb anomalies and atypical growth, among numerous other signs and symptoms. It is caused by variants in any one of seven genes, all of which have a structural or regulatory function in the cohesin complex. Although recent advances in next-generation sequencing have improved molecular diagnostics, marked heterogeneity exists in clinical and molecular diagnostic approaches and care practices worldwide. Here, we outline a series of recommendations that document the consensus of a group of international experts on clinical diagnostic criteria, both for classic CdLS and non-classic CdLS phenotypes, molecular investigations, long-term management and care planning.

[8] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome (CDL)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/cornelia_de_lange_syndrome
    snippet: ... limb reduction defects ranging from ... Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype.

[9] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/942792-overview
    snippet: MAU2 mutations can mimic classic CdLS, and EP300 variants can produce a CdLS-like phenotype in the form of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Mosaic ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[10] Cornelia de Lange syndrome: from a disease to a broader spectrum
    A Selicorni, M Mariani, A Lettieri, V Massa (2021)
    PMID:34356091 DOI:10.3390/genes12071075 https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/7/1075
    snippet: … possible correlations between clinical phenotype and molecular … only ones with classical limb reduction defects. Patients with … carrying a pathogenic variant in MAU2, interactor of NIPBL. …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetic disease that exemplifies the evolution of knowledge in the field of rare genetic disorders. Originally described as a unique pattern of major and minor anomalies, over time this syndrome has been shown to be characterized by a significant variability of clinical expression. By increasing the number of patients described, knowledge of the natural history of the condition has been enriched with the demonstration of the relative frequency of various potential comorbidities. Since 2006, the discovery of CdLS's molecular basis has shown an equally vast genetic heterogeneity linked to the presence of variants in genes encoding for the cohesin complex pathway. The most recent clinical-genetic data led to the classification of the "original syndrome" into a "clinical spectrum" that foresees the presence of classic patients, of non-classic forms, and of conditions that show a modest phenotypic overlapping with the original disease. Finally, the knowledge of the molecular basis of the disease has allowed the development of basic research projects that could lay the foundations for the development of possible innovative pharmacological treatments.