SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] De novo FBXO11 mutations are associated with intellectual disability and behavioural anomalies
    D Fritzen, A Kuechler, M Grimmel, J Becker, S Peters… (2018)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-018-1892-1 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-018-1892-1
    snippet: … Since it is not known whether any of these eight individuals showed behavioural anomalies or microcephaly and additionally the microcephaly in our individual 2 was only slight and …
    abstract: Intellectual disability (ID) has an estimated prevalence of 1.5-2%. In most affected individuals, its genetic basis remains unclear. Whole exome sequencing (WES) studies have identified a multitude of novel causative gene defects and have shown that a large proportion of sporadic ID cases results from de novo mutations. Here, we present two unrelated individuals with similar clinical features and deleterious de novo variants in FBXO11 detected by WES. Individual 1, a 14-year-old boy, has mild ID as well as mild microcephaly, corrected cleft lip and alveolus, hyperkinetic disorder, mild brain atrophy and minor facial dysmorphism. WES detected a heterozygous de novo 1 bp insertion in the splice donor site of exon 3. Individual 2, a 3-year-old boy, showed ID and pre- and postnatal growth retardation, postnatal mild microcephaly, hyperkinetic and restless behaviour, as well as mild dysmorphism. WES detected a heterozygous de novo frameshift mutation. While ten individuals with ID and de novo variants in FBXO11 have been reported as part of larger studies, only one of the reports has some additional clinical data. Interestingly, the latter individual carries the identical mutation as our individual 2 and also displays ID, intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly, behavioural anomalies, and dysmorphisms. Thus, we confirm deleterious de novo mutations in FBXO11 as a cause of ID and start the delineation of the associated clinical picture which may also comprise postnatal microcephaly or borderline small head size and behavioural anomalies.

[2] De novo variants in the F-box protein FBXO11 in 20 individuals with a variable neurodevelopmental disorder
    A Gregor, LG Sadleir, R Asadollahi… (2018)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(18)30230-1
    snippet: … FBXO11 (MIM: 607871) in a non-verbal individual with severe ID and short stature. So far, only two variants in FBXO11 … Tyr913*]) in an individual with developmental delay, microcephaly…
    abstract: Next-generation sequencing combined with international data sharing has enormously facilitated identification of new disease-associated genes and mutations. This is particularly true for genetically extremely heterogeneous entities such as neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Through exome sequencing and world-wide collaborations, we identified and assembled 20 individuals with de novo variants in FBXO11. They present with mild to severe developmental delay associated with a range of features including short (4/20) or tall (2/20) stature, obesity (5/20), microcephaly (4/19) or macrocephaly (2/19), behavioral problems (17/20), seizures (5/20), cleft lip or palate or bifid uvula (3/20), and minor skeletal anomalies. FBXO11 encodes a member of the F-Box protein family, constituting a subunit of an E3-ubiquitin ligase complex. This complex is involved in ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and thus in controlling critical biological processes by regulating protein turnover. The identified de novo aberrations comprise two large deletions, ten likely gene disrupting variants, and eight missense variants distributed throughout FBXO11. Structural modeling for missense variants located in the CASH or the Zinc-finger UBR domains suggests destabilization of the protein. This, in combination with the observed spectrum and localization of identified variants and the lack of apparent genotype-phenotype correlations, is compatible with loss of function or haploinsufficiency as an underlying mechanism. We implicate de novo missense and likely gene disrupting variants in FBXO11 in a neurodevelopmental disorder with variable intellectual disability and various other features.

[3] Defining FBXO11-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder: Clinical, Molecular and Facial Assessment of 21 Patients
    H Goel, G Garg, TS Barakat, G Barcia, A Bourgois… (2026)
    https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-10148333/latest
    snippet: Background Pathogenic variants in FBXO11 cause a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by intellectual disability, behavioural abnormalities, and subtle facial …
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>  <bold>Background</bold>  Pathogenic variants in  <italic>FBXO11</italic>  cause a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by intellectual disability, behavioural abnormalities, and subtle facial dysmorphism. The genotypic-phenotypic spectrum remains incompletely defined.  <bold>Methods</bold>  We describe 21 previously unreported individuals with heterozygous pathogenic or likely pathogenic  <italic>FBXO11</italic>  variants identified through clinical exome/genome sequencing. Detailed phenotypic data were collected and compared with published cases. Facial similarity was assessed using GestaltMatcher. Based on aggregated data, we propose structured diagnostic criteria.  <bold>Results</bold>  Mild intellectual disability (86%), facial dysmorphism (67%), hypotonia (62%), and behavioural dysregulation (62%) were the most prevalent features. Microcephaly occurred in 24%, while seizures were present in 43%. Brain imaging abnormalities were nonspecific and did not consistently correlate with epilepsy. Variants included missense, truncating, and multi-exon deletions, supporting haploinsufficiency as the principal pathogenic mechanism. Computational facial analysis demonstrated measurable intra-cohort similarity.  <bold>Conclusion</bold>  <italic>FBXO11</italic>  -related neurodevelopmental disorder frequently presents with mild cognitive impairment and subtle dysmorphism, suggesting under-recognition in milder cases. We propose semi-quantitative diagnostic criteria to support phenotypic assessment and variant interpretation.  </p>

[4] CUL1 variants cause severe neurodevelopmental disorders: Insights from human genetics and a zebrafish model of microcephaly
    H Xu, Z Liu, FF Hamdan, S Wu, M He, D Wang… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/hgg-advances/fulltext/S2666-2477(25)00145-9
    snippet: … Microcephaly is a neurodevelopmental anomaly … While numerous genes have been implicated in microcephaly, the … gene in four unrelated families with severe microcephaly, ID, and …
    abstract: Microcephaly is a neurodevelopmental anomaly characterized by reduced head circumference and impaired brain growth, often accompanied by intellectual disability (ID), developmental delays, and seizures. While numerous genes have been implicated in microcephaly, the role of the SCF (Skp1-Cul1-F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase complex, particularly its core component CUL1, remains poorly understood. In this study, we identified heterozygous de novo and inherited variants in the CUL1 gene in four unrelated families with severe microcephaly, ID, and developmental delays. To investigate the functional consequences of CUL1 loss of function, we developed a zebrafish model with knockdown of cul1a&b, which exhibited significant reductions in central nervous system size and behavioral defects, mirroring the clinical phenotypes observed in patients. These findings establish CUL1 as a novel gene associated with severe neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) and highlight its critical role in brain development. Our study provides genotype-phenotype correlations for CUL1 in NDDs, expanding the genetic spectrum of disorders linked to the SCF complex and underscoring its importance in neurodevelopment.

[5] De novo missense variants in FBXW11 cause diverse developmental phenotypes including brain, eye, and digit anomalies
    RJ Holt, RM Young, B Crespo, F Ceroni… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30268-X
    snippet: The identification of genetic variants implicated in human developmental disorders has been revolutionized by second-generation sequencing combined with international pooling of …
    abstract: The identification of genetic variants implicated in human developmental disorders has been revolutionized by second-generation sequencing combined with international pooling of cases. Here, we describe seven individuals who have diverse yet overlapping developmental anomalies, and who all have de novo missense FBXW11 variants identified by whole exome or whole genome sequencing and not reported in the gnomAD database. Their phenotypes include striking neurodevelopmental, digital, jaw, and eye anomalies, and in one individual, features resembling Noonan syndrome, a condition caused by dysregulated RAS signaling. FBXW11 encodes an F-box protein, part of the Skp1-cullin-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex, involved in ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and thus fundamental to many protein regulatory processes. FBXW11 targets include β-catenin and GLI transcription factors, key mediators of Wnt and Hh signaling, respectively, critical to digital, neurological, and eye development. Structural analyses indicate affected residues cluster at the surface of the loops of the substrate-binding domain of FBXW11, and the variants are predicted to destabilize the protein and/or its interactions. In situ hybridization studies on human and zebrafish embryonic tissues demonstrate FBXW11 is expressed in the developing eye, brain, mandibular processes, and limb buds or pectoral fins. Knockdown of the zebrafish FBXW11 orthologs fbxw11a and fbxw11b resulted in embryos with smaller, misshapen, and underdeveloped eyes and abnormal jaw and pectoral fin development. Our findings support the role of FBXW11 in multiple developmental processes, including those involving the brain, eye, digits, and jaw.

[6] De novo missense variants in FBXO11 alter its protein ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC8825234 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8825234/
    snippet: by A Gregor · 2021 · Cited by 20 — Recently, others and we identified de novo FBXO11 (F-Box only protein 11) variants ... Growth parameters are highly variable with short stature and microcephaly ...
    abstract: Recently, others and we identified de novo FBXO11 (F-Box only protein 11) variants as causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD). We now assembled clinical and mutational information on 23 additional individuals. The phenotypic spectrum remains highly variable, with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability as the core feature and behavioral anomalies, hypotonia and various facial dysmorphism as frequent aspects. The mutational spectrum includes intragenic deletions, likely gene disrupting and missense variants distributed across the protein. To further characterize the functional consequences of FBXO11 missense variants, we analyzed their effects on protein expression and localization by overexpression of 17 different mutant constructs in HEK293 and HeLa cells. We found that the majority of missense variants resulted in subcellular mislocalization and/or reduced FBXO11 protein expression levels. For instance, variants located in the nuclear localization signal and the N-terminal F-Box domain lead to altered subcellular localization with exclusion from the nucleus or the formation of cytoplasmic aggregates and to reduced protein levels in western blot. In contrast, variants localized in the C-terminal Zn-finger UBR domain lead to an accumulation in the cytoplasm without alteration of protein levels. Together with the mutational data, our functional results suggest that most missense variants likely lead to a loss of the original FBXO11 function and thereby highlight haploinsufficiency as the most likely disease mechanism for FBXO11-associated NDDs.

[7] FBXO11-Related Syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.simonssearchlight.org/gene-guide/fbxo11/
    snippet: ... FBXO11 they will likely have symptoms of FBXO11-related syndrome. ... More people had a smaller than average head size, also called microcephaly, than a larger ...

[8] De novo FBXO11 mutations are associated with intellectual ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29796876/
    snippet: by D Fritzen · 2018 · Cited by 44 — ... FBXO11 detected by WES. Individual 1, a 14-year-old boy, has mild ID as well as mild microcephaly, corrected cleft lip and alveolus ...
    abstract: Intellectual disability (ID) has an estimated prevalence of 1.5-2%. In most affected individuals, its genetic basis remains unclear. Whole exome sequencing (WES) studies have identified a multitude of novel causative gene defects and have shown that a large proportion of sporadic ID cases results from de novo mutations. Here, we present two unrelated individuals with similar clinical features and deleterious de novo variants in FBXO11 detected by WES. Individual 1, a 14-year-old boy, has mild ID as well as mild microcephaly, corrected cleft lip and alveolus, hyperkinetic disorder, mild brain atrophy and minor facial dysmorphism. WES detected a heterozygous de novo 1 bp insertion in the splice donor site of exon 3. Individual 2, a 3-year-old boy, showed ID and pre- and postnatal growth retardation, postnatal mild microcephaly, hyperkinetic and restless behaviour, as well as mild dysmorphism. WES detected a heterozygous de novo frameshift mutation. While ten individuals with ID and de novo variants in FBXO11 have been reported as part of larger studies, only one of the reports has some additional clinical data. Interestingly, the latter individual carries the identical mutation as our individual 2 and also displays ID, intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly, behavioural anomalies, and dysmorphisms. Thus, we confirm deleterious de novo mutations in FBXO11 as a cause of ID and start the delineation of the associated clinical picture which may also comprise postnatal microcephaly or borderline small head size and behavioural anomalies.

[9] How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721224000363
    snippet: by A Mégarbané · 2024 · Cited by 2 — Microcephaly. ;. Scoliosis. ;. Whole exome sequencing. 1. Introduction. FBXO11 (homo sapiens F-box protein 11) belongs to the family of the F-box proteins ...
    abstract: Here we report the case of a young boy with developmental delay, thin sparse hair, early closure of the anterior fontanel, bilateral choanal atresia, brachyturicephaly; and dysmorphic features closely resembling those seen in trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS). These features include sparse hair, sparse lateral eyebrows, a bulbous pear shaped nose, a long philtrum, thin lips, small/hypoplastic nails, pes planovalgus; bilateral cone-shaped epiphyses at the proximal 5th phalanx, slender long bones, coxa valga, mild scoliosis, and delayed bone age. Given that TRPS had been excluded by a thorough genetic analysis, whole exome sequencing was performed and a heterozygous likely pathogenic variant was identified in the FBXO11 gene (NM_001190274.2: c.1781A > G; p. His594Arg), confirming the diagnosis of the newly individualized IDDFBA syndrome: Intellectual Developmental Disorder, dysmorphic Facies, and Behavioral Abnormalities (OMIM# 618,089). Our findings further delineate the clinical spectrum linked to FBXO11 and highlight the importance of investigating further cases with mutations in this gene to establish a potential genotype-phenotype correlation.

[10] Gene: FBXO11 -
    (authors not shown)
    https://gene.sfari.org/database/human-gene/FBXO11
    snippet: De Novo Variants in the F-Box Protein FBXO11 in 20 Individuals with a Variable Neurodevelopmental Disorder ... Behavioral abnormalities, microcephaly. 5, Support ...