SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] PLAA mutations cause a lethal infantile epileptic encephalopathy by disrupting ubiquitin-mediated endolysosomal degradation of synaptic proteins
    EA Hall, MS Nahorski, LM Murray, R Shaheen… (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30113-1
    snippet: … , and optic atrophy developed in the first year (Figure 1F). Most had seizures that began … The occurrence of GMEPPs, together with increased MEPP frequency, is also observed in …
    abstract: During neurotransmission, synaptic vesicles undergo multiple rounds of exo-endocytosis, involving recycling and/or degradation of synaptic proteins. While ubiquitin signaling at synapses is essential for neural function, it has been assumed that synaptic proteostasis requires the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). We demonstrate here that turnover of synaptic membrane proteins via the endolysosomal pathway is essential for synaptic function. In both human and mouse, hypomorphic mutations in the ubiquitin adaptor protein PLAA cause an infantile-lethal neurodysfunction syndrome with seizures. Resulting from perturbed endolysosomal degradation, Plaa mutant neurons accumulate K63-polyubiquitylated proteins and synaptic membrane proteins, disrupting synaptic vesicle recycling and neurotransmission. Through characterization of this neurological intracellular trafficking disorder, we establish the importance of ubiquitin-mediated endolysosomal trafficking at the synapse.

[2] PEHO syndrome: the endpoint of different genetic epilepsies
    M Chitre, MS Nahorski, K Stouffer… (2018)
    https://jmg.bmj.com/content/55/12/803.abstract
    snippet: … the diagnosis in the absence of optic atrophy as this feature is … mental delay and seizures in the first year of life. Two had … pathogenic variant in the gene PLAA; c.68G>T p.Gly23Val. …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Progressive encephalopathy, hypsarrhythmia and optic atrophy (PEHO) has been described as a clinically distinct syndrome. It has been postulated that it is an autosomal recessive condition. However, the aetiology is poorly understood, and the genetic basis of the condition has not been fully elucidated. Our objective was to discover if PEHO syndrome is a single gene disorder.<h4>Method</h4>Children with PEHO and PEHO-like syndrome were recruited. Clinical, neurological and dysmorphic features were recorded; EEG reports and MRI scans were reviewed. Where possible, exome sequencing was carried out first to seek mutations in known early infantile developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) genes and then to use an agnostic approach to seek novel candidate genes. We sought intra-interfamilial phenotypic correlations and genotype-phenotype correlations when pathological mutations were identified.<h4>Results</h4>Twenty-three children were recruited from a diverse ethnic background, 19 of which were suitable for inclusion. They were similar in many of the core and the supporting features of PEHO, but there was significant variation in MRI and ophthalmological findings, even between siblings with the same mutation. A pathogenic genetic variant was identified in 15 of the 19 children. One further girl's DNA failed analysis, but her two affected sisters shared confirmed variants. Pathogenic variants were identified in seven different genes.<h4>Conclusions</h4>We found significant clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Given the intrafamily variation demonstrated, we question whether the diagnostic criteria for MRI and ophthalmic findings should be altered. We also question whether PEHO and PEHO-like syndrome represent differing points on a clinical spectrum of the DEE. We conclude that PEHO and PEHO-like syndrome are clinically and genetically diverse entities-and are phenotypic endpoints of many severe genetic encephalopathies.

[3] DD1 5EH
    EA Hall, MS Nahorski, LM Murray, R Shaheen…
    https://api.repository.cam.ac.uk/server/api/core/bitstreams/7262623c-b49a-4ef4-b2be-66701b32659f/content
    snippet: … We demonstrate that PLAA is required for the Ub-mediated sorting of membrane proteins from … was clear by six months that he had gross visual impairment; mild optic atrophy was noted …

[4] Clinical neurogenetics: neurologic presentations of metabolic disorders
    JM Kwon, ED Kristin (2013)
    PMID:24176422 DOI:10.1016/j.ncl.2013.04.005 https://www.neurologic.theclinics.com/article/S0733-8619(13)00044-3/abstract
    snippet: … Later complications can include ataxia, optic atrophy and … Diagnosis: the presence of alloisoleucine on PlAA analysis is … late-onset seizures (up to 2 y of age); seizures that initially …
    abstract: This article reviews aspects of the neurologic presentations of selected treatable inborn errors of metabolism within the category of small molecule disorders caused by defects in pathways of intermediary metabolism. Disorders that are particularly likely to be seen by neurologists include those associated with defects in amino acid metabolism (organic acidemias, aminoacidopathies, urea cycle defects). Other disorders of small molecule metabolism are discussed as additional examples in which early treatments have the potential for better outcomes.

[5] PEHO syndrome caused by compound heterozygote variants in ZNHIT3 gene
    K Õunap, K Muru, E Õiglane (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721219301788
    snippet: … by 12 months of age, facial dysmorphism and optic atrophy. Brain MRI and CT show early … seizures: myoclonias and infantile spasms Generalized seizures Generalized seizures …
    abstract: PEHO syndrome is characterized by Progressive Encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhythmia, and Optic atrophy, which was first described in Finnish patients. A homozygous missense substitution p.Ser31Leu in ZNHIT3 was recently identified as the primary cause of PEHO syndrome in Finland. Variants in ZNHIT3 have not been identified in patients with PEHO or PEHO-like syndrome in other populations. It has therefore been suggested that PEHO syndrome caused by ZNHIT3 variants does not occur outside of the Finnish population. We describe the first patient outside Finland who carries compound heterozygous variants in ZNHIT3 gene causing PEHO syndrome. Trio genome sequencing was carried out and the identified variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The patient filled all diagnostic clinical criteria of PEHO syndrome. We identified biallelic missense variants in ZNHIT3 gene: the c.92C > T p.(Ser31Leu) variant (NM_004773.3), which is described previously as causing PEHO syndrome and the second novel variant c.41G > T p.(Cys14Phe). There are only eight heterozygous carriers of c.41G > T variant in the gnomAD database and it is predicted damaging by multiple in silico algorithms. The ZNHIT3-associated PEHO syndrome exists outside of the Finnish population.

[6] PLAA Mutations Cause a Lethal Infantile Epileptic ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC5420347 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5420347/
    snippet: by EA Hall · 2017 · Cited by 50 — ... PLAA cause an infantile-lethal neurodysfunction ... seizures and neurological involvement including optic atrophy and MRI abnormalities.
    abstract: During neurotransmission, synaptic vesicles undergo multiple rounds of exo-endocytosis, involving recycling and/or degradation of synaptic proteins. While ubiquitin signaling at synapses is essential for neural function, it has been assumed that synaptic proteostasis requires the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). We demonstrate here that turnover of synaptic membrane proteins via the endolysosomal pathway is essential for synaptic function. In both human and mouse, hypomorphic mutations in the ubiquitin adaptor protein PLAA cause an infantile-lethal neurodysfunction syndrome with seizures. Resulting from perturbed endolysosomal degradation, Plaa mutant neurons accumulate K63-polyubiquitylated proteins and synaptic membrane proteins, disrupting synaptic vesicle recycling and neurotransmission. Through characterization of this neurological intracellular trafficking disorder, we establish the importance of ubiquitin-mediated endolysosomal trafficking at the synapse.

[7] PEHO syndrome: the endpoint of different genetic epilepsies
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105288 https://www.ovid.com/journals/jmge/pdf/10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105288~peho-syndrome-the-endpoint-of-different-genetic-epilepsies
    snippet: that a complex PEHO phenotype with optic atrophy could result ... tonic seizures. In the elder two children ... pathogenic variant in the gene PLAA; c.68G>T p.
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Progressive encephalopathy, hypsarrhythmia and optic atrophy (PEHO) has been described as a clinically distinct syndrome. It has been postulated that it is an autosomal recessive condition. However, the aetiology is poorly understood, and the genetic basis of the condition has not been fully elucidated. Our objective was to discover if PEHO syndrome is a single gene disorder.<h4>Method</h4>Children with PEHO and PEHO-like syndrome were recruited. Clinical, neurological and dysmorphic features were recorded; EEG reports and MRI scans were reviewed. Where possible, exome sequencing was carried out first to seek mutations in known early infantile developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) genes and then to use an agnostic approach to seek novel candidate genes. We sought intra-interfamilial phenotypic correlations and genotype-phenotype correlations when pathological mutations were identified.<h4>Results</h4>Twenty-three children were recruited from a diverse ethnic background, 19 of which were suitable for inclusion. They were similar in many of the core and the supporting features of PEHO, but there was significant variation in MRI and ophthalmological findings, even between siblings with the same mutation. A pathogenic genetic variant was identified in 15 of the 19 children. One further girl's DNA failed analysis, but her two affected sisters shared confirmed variants. Pathogenic variants were identified in seven different genes.<h4>Conclusions</h4>We found significant clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Given the intrafamily variation demonstrated, we question whether the diagnostic criteria for MRI and ophthalmic findings should be altered. We also question whether PEHO and PEHO-like syndrome represent differing points on a clinical spectrum of the DEE. We conclude that PEHO and PEHO-like syndrome are clinically and genetically diverse entities-and are phenotypic endpoints of many severe genetic encephalopathies.

[8] Like Syndrome: What Diagnostic Characteristics Are Defining?
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/7774354_Progressive_Encephalopathy_with_Edema_Hypsarrhythmia_and_Optic_Nerve_Atrophy_PEHO-Like_Syndrome_What_Diagnostic_Characteristics_Are_Defining
    snippet: ... seizures, and cerebellar atrophy. A condition ... optic atrophy. ( J Child Neurol 2005;20:454—456 ... PLAA, UBA5, CASK, CCDC88A, SCN1A reported in ...
    abstract: Progressive encephalopathy with edema, hypsarrhythmia, and optic nerve atrophy (PEHO) syndrome is a rare, apparently autosomal recessive condition in which characteristic dysmorphic features are associated with subcutaneous edema, visual deficit, early arrest of psychomotor development, seizures, and cerebellar atrophy. A condition similar to PEHO syndrome, but without the neuroradiologic or ophthalmologic signs, is known as PEHO-like syndrome. We present the case of a child with PEHO-like syndrome and underline the need for a careful follow-up of these patients to identify signs and symptoms that can have a later onset, such as optic atrophy.

[9] PEHO syndrome–The end point of severe epilepsies
    M Chitre, B Bambrough, A Parker… (2017)
    https://www.ejpn-journal.com/article/S1090-3798(17)31448-4/abstract
    snippet: … refractory epilepsy and acquired cataracts due to a de novo mutation … and optic atrophy (PEHO) is a recognised rare clinically … Mutations were seen in SCN1A, SCN2A, PLAA and UBA5. …

[10] Clinical and genetic features of PEHO and PEHO-Like syndromes: A scoping review
    H Sabaie, NK Ahangar, S Ghafouri (2020)
    PMID:33152950 DOI:10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110793 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0753332220309860
    snippet: … , hypsarrhythmia, and optic atrophy (PEHO) syndrome is a … PEHO spectrum disorders are highly clinically and genetically … It is worth mentioning that epilepsy in PEHO and PEHO-like …
    abstract: Progressive encephalopathy with edema, hypsarrhythmia, and optic atrophy (PEHO) syndrome is a genetic neurological condition characterized by extreme cerebellar atrophy. PEHO-Like syndrome is comparable to PEHO syndrome, with the exception that there is no typical neuro-radiologic or neuro-ophthalmic findings. PEHO spectrum disorders are highly clinically and genetically heterogeneous, and this has challenged their diagnosis. This scoping review aims to summarize and discuss common clinical and genetic features of these syndromes to help future researches. This study was performed according to a six-stage methodology structure and PRISMA guideline. A systematic search of seven databases was performed to find eligible publications prior to June 2020. Articles screening and data extraction were independently performed by two reviewers and quantitative and qualitative analyses were conducted. Thirty-eight articles were identified that fulfill the inclusion criteria. Cerebellar atrophy was the main clinical difference between the two groups but data on optic atrophy and infantile spasms/hypsarrhythmia were not consistent with the previously essential diagnostic criteria. Genetic analysis was performed in several studies, leading to identification of pathogenic variants in different genes that caused these conditions due to different mechanisms. Genetic studies could revolutionize the diagnosis process and our understanding of the etiology of this challenging group of patients by providing targeted sequencing panels and exome- or genome-scale studies in the future.