SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — ... Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome ... (C) The SVM-generated MVP scores ranging from 0 to 1, indicating similarity to the MSL2 episignature, with high ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] MSL3 variants cause a novel syndrome a, Representation ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/MSL3-variants-cause-a-novel-syndrome-a-Representation-of-the-MSL3-patient-countries-of_fig5_327702211
    snippet: MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as ...

[3] MSL2 gene MSL Complex Subunit 2
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/MSL2
    snippet: ... MSL2. Details, #, Disorder, Short Description, Categories, Inheritance, Evidence, References. 1, Basilicata-Akhtar Syndrome, X-linked intellectual disability ...

[4] Overview of the position of case variants on the MSL3- ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Overview-of-the-position-of-case-variants-on-the-MSL3-MSL1-tetrameric-complex-a_fig2_345847438
    snippet: ... (Basilicata–Akhtar syndrome). Methods Twenty-five individuals (15 males, 10 ... MSL2 gene (OMIM: 614802) which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme.

[5] Vandana Shashi | Scholars@Duke profile: Scholarly Works
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholars.duke.edu/person/vandana.shashi/scholarly-works
    snippet: MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of ... (Basilicata-Akhtar syndrome). METHODS: Twenty-five individuals (15 males, 10 ...

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … Within the lysine acetyltransferase class, MOF (KAT8) is … complex, MSL3 (MIM: 300609), lead to the Basilicata-Akhtar syn… Variant description A total of 21 different MSL2 variants were …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] KAT8-mediated epigenetic modifications: Physiological functions, heterogeneity in disease, and advances in targeted development
    Z Wang, G Ren, P Gao (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/iscience/fulltext/S2589-0042(26)02056-0
    snippet: … KANSL1 binds and activates KAT8 via its NSL1 HAT activation motif (NHAM) domain, complementary to the MRG domain of MSL3.This engages KAT8 for a different destination: the …
    abstract: KAT8 (MOF/MYST1) is a core histone acetyltransferase of the MYST family. Beyond its canonical H4K16ac activity, KAT8 catalyzes diverse acylations and regulates stem cell biology, DNA repair, metabolism, and immunity. This review systematically integrates KAT8's regulatory networks across physiology and disease. We decipher the molecular basis of its context-dependent "double-edged sword" role in cancer, acting predominantly as an oncoprotein yet exhibiting tumor-suppressive functions under specific conditions. We evaluate current KAT8 inhibitor development, from early non-selective compounds to selective leads, and highlight persistent translational hurdles including insufficient specificity and limited <i>in vivo</i> efficacy. This work provides a comprehensive framework that clarifies recent controversies-such as whether H4K16ac primarily governs transcription or replication timing, and which KAT8-containing complex catalyzes, which acetylation mark-and establishes a rationale for future precision-targeting strategies and biomarker development grounded in KAT8 functional heterogeneity.

[8] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs neurogenesis, and alters histone H4K16 acetylation
    S Luo, S Qu, S Tan, Z Song, Y Lv, X Jia, J Tan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf
    snippet: … and clinical phenotype data of MSL2, MSL3 and KAT8 from … To systematically delineate the variant pattern and compare … autism spectrum disorder (64.3%), while MSL3 variants were …

[9] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome (KBHS) is characterized by developmental delay and impaired intellectual development ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38815585/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.