SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic … truncated …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[2] Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense-mediated decay uncovers candidate Mendelian diseases
    RI Torene, MJG Sacoto, F Millan, Z Zhang… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00402-0
    snippet: … Such truncating variants in DAGLA remove phosphorylation … (eg, MSL2) have more sampling of the phenotypic spectrum; … ), both with ventriculomegaly and craniofacial abnormalities in …
    abstract: Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 3' end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent-offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one high-confidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease-associated genes and identify potentially novel disease-associated genes.

[3] Looking back at 2024 in the European Journal of Human Genetics
    A McNeill (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-025-01800-5
    snippet: … might manifest a milder phenotype. Unusual physical signs or … , associated with fetal ventriculomegaly on prenatal imaging [… -truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in …

[4] Bi-allelic variants in NAE1 cause intellectual disability, ischiopubic hypoplasia, stress-mediated lymphopenia and neurodegeneration
    IJJ Muffels, IF Schene, H Rehmann… (2023)
    PMID:36608681 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.12.003 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(22)00537-7
    snippet: … cellular phenotypes. To delineate how cellular consequences of NAE1 deficiency would lead to the clinical phenotype, we focused primarily on the rarest phenotypic … Truncating SCN1A …
    abstract: Neddylation has been implicated in various cellular pathways and in the pathophysiology of numerous diseases. We identified four individuals with bi-allelic variants in NAE1, which encodes the neddylation E1 enzyme. Pathogenicity was supported by decreased NAE1 abundance and overlapping clinical and cellular phenotypes. To delineate how cellular consequences of NAE1 deficiency would lead to the clinical phenotype, we focused primarily on the rarest phenotypic features, based on the assumption that these would best reflect the pathophysiology at stake. Two of the rarest features, neuronal loss and lymphopenia worsening during infections, suggest that NAE1 is required during cellular stress caused by infections to protect against cell death. In support, we found that stressing the proteasome system with MG132-requiring upregulation of neddylation to restore proteasomal function and proteasomal stress-led to increased cell death in fibroblasts of individuals with NAE1 genetic variants. Additionally, we found decreased lymphocyte counts after CD3/CD28 stimulation and decreased NF-κB translocation in individuals with NAE1 variants. The rarest phenotypic feature-delayed closure of the ischiopubic rami-correlated with significant downregulation of RUN2X and SOX9 expression in transcriptomic data of fibroblasts. Both genes are involved in the pathophysiology of ischiopubic hypoplasia. Thus, we show that NAE1 plays a major role in (skeletal) development and cellular homeostasis during stress. Our approach suggests that a focus on rare phenotypic features is able to provide significant pathophysiological insights in diseases caused by mutations in genes with pleiotropic effects.

[5] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12881215 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12881215/
    snippet: by O Zgheib · 2025 · Cited by 1 — Although both anomalies are known to cause neurodevelopmental disorders, ventriculomegaly has so far only been associated with MSL2 variants. These two ...
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[6] Prenatal diagnosis of MSL2‐related ventriculomegaly in ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://access.archive-ouverte.unige.ch/access/metadata/71bb44a0-127e-47bf-92c9-4384a3aa684e/download
    snippet: by O Zgheib · 2026 · Cited by 1 — Although both anom- alies are known to cause neurodevelopmental disorders, ventriculomegaly has so far only been associated with MSL2 variants.
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[7] Prenatal diagnosis of MSL2‐related ventriculomegaly in ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/journal/Clinical-Genetics-1399-0004/publication/395525778_Prenatal_Diagnosis_of_MSL2-Related_Ventriculomegaly_in_Association_With_an_Inherited_15q13_Microduplication/links/68c8d1529534473a6d4aed40/Prenatal-Diagnosis-of-MSL2-Related-Ventriculomegaly-in-Association-With-an-Inherited-15q13-Microduplication.pdf
    snippet: ... MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum. ... to ventriculomegaly, and a novel de novo splice MSL2 variant ... Truncating Variants ...
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[8] Article Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929723004020
    snippet: by RI Torene · 2024 · Cited by 47 — Frameshift and missense variants in HDAC2 and MSL2 have been reported in large cohorts of individuals with NDDs. ... ventriculomegaly. He ...

[9] My little one has been diagnosed with MSL2. Only 25 other ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.facebook.com/groups/594064706877027/posts/964696803147147/
    snippet: ... Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 ... / MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome...PubMed ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and phenotypes associated these … tative of our cohort such as cerebral anomalies, seizures, and neuromotor impairment. …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.