SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: … and phenotypic consequences of MAU2 variants. Our … phenotypes to MAU2 alone. Moreover, the scarcity of reported variants had limited our understanding of the phenotypic spectrum …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[2] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 lead to a new Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2025)
    PMC12668068 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12668068/
    snippet: … and phenotypic consequences of MAU2 variants. Our … phenotypes to MAU2 alone. Moreover, the scarcity of reported variants had limited our understanding of the phenotypic spectrum …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While  NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of  MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous  MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. MAU2 in-frame variants predominantly impair NIPBL–MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause  MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most patients exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also identified two  MAU2 -specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features. A heterozygous  Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulated these traits, confirming the causal role of  MAU2 disruption  in vivo. Our study establishes  MAU2 as a new CdLS-associated gene and delineates a  MAU2 -related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[3] Cornelia de Lange spectrum
    Á Ascaso, M Arnedo, B Puisac… (2024)
    PMID:40186517 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.64076 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2341287924001388
    snippet: … of additional genes (BRD4, ANKRD11, MAU2), but the lack of … Cornelia de Lange syndrome can be considered an … The diagram shows the clinical spectrum caused by changes in …
    abstract: The cohesin complex plays crucial roles in DNA repair, chromatid separation, and gene transcription regulation. Pathogenic variants in cohesins or dysfunctional transcriptional regulators lead to cohesinopathies, a broader group of disorders including Cornelia de Lange Spectrum (CdLSp), for which the prevalence of cancer cases remains unclear. Here, we aimed to assess the prevalence of oncological events in CdLSp and elucidate the role of cohesin variants in cancer predisposition. We developed a custom next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel targeting predisposition and pathogenic genes, which we applied on N = 120 samples of pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), identifying 11 out of 229 total-10 germline and 1 somatic-variants in cohesin genes. Data of N = 205 brain tumors were extracted by bioinformatic analysis of data from open-source databases carrying 19 somatic variants. In a cohort of 54 CdLSp patients, the largest cohort from a single center, with a median age of 13 years, the hypothesis of an increased prevalence of cancer in CdLSp was not confirmed. Our findings highlight a significant involvement of germline NIPBL variants in CdLSp, whereas RAD21 and STAG1/2 are predominantly found as somatic variants in neoplasms. However, a distinct genetic or molecular pattern distinguishing variants leading to CdLSp from tumors was not identified. Hence, we advocate for further investigation into the relationship between cohesin variants and cancer predisposition in a larger cohort of patients, with a longer observation time and including different types of malignancies, with more focus on epigenetic approaches.

[4] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, HM AlDhalaan, FJ Kaiser, F Al (2026)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/author/24170976000/hesham-m-aldhalaan
    snippet: … These disorders encompass a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations, ranging from severe… the clinical utility of rapid sequencing (Flash Exome). Our cohort’s genotypic and phenotypic …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[5] MAU2 and NIPBL variants impair the heterodimerization of the cohesin loader subunits and cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    I Parenti, F Diab, SR Gil, E Mulugeta, V Casa, R Berutti… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/cell-reports/fulltext/S2211-1247(20)30600-8
    snippet: … Here we describe the first genetic variant in MAU2 causing a CdLS phenotype. The … the phenotype of the spectrum of NIPBL mutations. The commonalities between the MAU2 and …
    abstract: The NIPBL/MAU2 heterodimer loads cohesin onto chromatin. Mutations in NIPBL account for most cases of the rare developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Here we report a MAU2 variant causing CdLS, a deletion of seven amino acids that impairs the interaction between MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus. Investigating this interaction, we discovered that MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus are largely dispensable for normal cohesin and NIPBL function in cells with a NIPBL early truncating mutation. Despite a predicted fatal outcome of an out-of-frame single nucleotide duplication in NIPBL, engineered in two different cell lines, alternative translation initiation yields a form of NIPBL missing N-terminal residues. This form cannot interact with MAU2, but binds DNA and mediates cohesin loading. Altogether, our work reveals that cohesin loading can occur independently of functional NIPBL/MAU2 complexes and highlights a novel mechanism protective against out-of-frame mutations that is potentially relevant for other genetic conditions.

[6] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1104/
    snippet: by MA Deardorff · 2020 · Cited by 188 — Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) constitutes a clinical spectrum ... MAU2 pathogenic variant display a wide range of phenotypes, from ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[7] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/942792-overview
    snippet: ... phenotypes, including BRD4, ANKRD11, MAU2, and EP300. ... Behavioral Phenotype and Autism Spectrum Disorders in Cornelia de Lange Syndrome.
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[8] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome: From a Disease to a ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34356091 DOI:10.3390/genes12071075 https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/7/1075
    snippet: by A Selicorni · 2021 · Cited by 53 — Parenti et al. recently described a patient with a severe phenotype and typical CdLS facial dysmorphism carrying a pathogenic variant in MAU2, ...
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetic disease that exemplifies the evolution of knowledge in the field of rare genetic disorders. Originally described as a unique pattern of major and minor anomalies, over time this syndrome has been shown to be characterized by a significant variability of clinical expression. By increasing the number of patients described, knowledge of the natural history of the condition has been enriched with the demonstration of the relative frequency of various potential comorbidities. Since 2006, the discovery of CdLS's molecular basis has shown an equally vast genetic heterogeneity linked to the presence of variants in genes encoding for the cohesin complex pathway. The most recent clinical-genetic data led to the classification of the "original syndrome" into a "clinical spectrum" that foresees the presence of classic patients, of non-classic forms, and of conditions that show a modest phenotypic overlapping with the original disease. Finally, the knowledge of the molecular basis of the disease has allowed the development of basic research projects that could lay the foundations for the development of possible innovative pharmacological treatments.

[9] Diagnosis and management of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:29995837 DOI:10.1038/s41576-018-0031-0 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-018-0031-0
    snippet: by AD Kline · 2018 · Cited by 527 — Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is an archetypical genetic syndrome that is characterized by intellectual disability, well-defined facial ...
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is an archetypical genetic syndrome that is characterized by intellectual disability, well-defined facial features, upper limb anomalies and atypical growth, among numerous other signs and symptoms. It is caused by variants in any one of seven genes, all of which have a structural or regulatory function in the cohesin complex. Although recent advances in next-generation sequencing have improved molecular diagnostics, marked heterogeneity exists in clinical and molecular diagnostic approaches and care practices worldwide. Here, we outline a series of recommendations that document the consensus of a group of international experts on clinical diagnostic criteria, both for classic CdLS and non-classic CdLS phenotypes, molecular investigations, long-term management and care planning.

[10] Mutation Spectrum and Genotype–Phenotype Correlation in ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:39501060 DOI:10.1038/s41390-024-03687-2 PMC3880228 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3880228/
    snippet: by L Mannini · 2013 · Cited by 268 — Mutation Spectrum and Genotype–Phenotype Correlation in ... Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction.
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>MMA incidence is significantly greater in China than in the rest of the world, but the mutation spectrum of MMA in China has not yet been mapped.<h4>Methods</h4>We summarized published MMA-related articles and conducted a systematic meta-analysis of the literature.<h4>Results</h4>We analyzed the gene variants information of 926 pediatric MMA patients in China; 517 were children with combined MMA, and 409 were children with isolated MMA. Almost all combined MMA cases were caused by MMACHC gene mutations (cblC-type). The c.609G>A variation was the most common in cblC-type children, accounting for 43.01%, followed by c.658_660delAAG, c.482G>A, c.80A>G, and c.394C>T variations. Mut-type MMA patients accounted for 98.8% (404/409) of all isolated MMA cases. The variant MMUT c.729_730insTT accounted for 10.30% (80/802) of all variants and was the most common variant in mut-type children, followed by c.323G>A and c.1106G>A.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our study summarized and characterized the mutation spectrum of Chinese pediatric patients with MMACHC and MMUT variants, and we also analyzed the relationships between common variants, onset time, and clinical phenotype. These findings will contribute to understanding the phenotypic characteristics and overall pathogenesis of MMA patients, supporting the goal of gene therapy.<h4>Impact</h4>The incidence of methylmalonic academia (MMA) in China is significantly greater than that in the rest of the world, but the mutation spectrum of MMA in China has not yet been mapped. In this paper, for the first time, we investigated hot-spot gene variants in MMA patients in China and comprehensively described the MMA gene mutation spectrum of the Chinese population. We explored the relationship between MMA genotype and clinical phenotype in patients, providing a basis for family genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis, and newborn screening.