SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 … ,3,4); IDDSELD, intellectual developmental disorder with seizures and … DHX9 is used as the loading control. Immunoblotting …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] GA4GH phenopacket-driven characterization of genotype-phenotype correlations in Mendelian disorders
    L Rekerle, D Danis, F Rehburg, ASL Graefe… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(25)00472-0
    snippet: … We applied GPSEA to 85 cohorts with 6,179 previously … 253 significant GPCs, with 48 cohorts having at least one statistically … Disease diagnosis: Neurodevelopmental disorder with …
    abstract: Comprehensively characterizing genotype-phenotype correlations (GPCs) in Mendelian disease would create new opportunities for improving clinical management and understanding disease biology. However, heterogeneous approaches to data sharing, reuse, and analysis have hindered progress in the field. We developed Genotype-Phenotype Statistical Evaluation of Associations (GPSEA), a software package that leverages the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) Phenopacket Schema to represent case-level clinical and genetic data about individuals. GPSEA applies an independent filtering strategy to boost statistical power to detect categorical GPCs represented by Human Phenotype Ontology terms. GPSEA additionally enables visualization and analysis of continuous phenotypes, clinical severity scores, and survival data such as age of onset of disease or clinical manifestations. We applied GPSEA to 85 cohorts with 6,179 previously published individuals with variants in one of 81 genes associated with 122 Mendelian diseases and identified 253 significant GPCs, with 48 cohorts having at least one statistically significant GPC. These results highlight the power of standardized representations of clinical data for scalable discovery of GPCs in Mendelian disease.

[3] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    PMID:41544630 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.12.011 https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … We demonstrate a neurodevelopmental phenotypic spectrum … Both variants are seen in the heterozygous state in our cohort … in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.

[4] Intrinsic disorder of the BAF complex: roles in chromatin remodeling and disease development
    N El Hadidy, VN Uversky (2019)
    PMID:31652801 DOI:10.3390/ijms20215260 https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/20/21/5260
    snippet: … with the pathogenesis of intellectual developmental disorder with persistence of fetal … 25% of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in pediatrics and adult cohorts, correspondingly [200]. TALL …
    abstract: The two-meter-long DNA is compressed into chromatin in the nucleus of every cell, which serves as a significant barrier to transcription. Therefore, for processes such as replication and transcription to occur, the highly compacted chromatin must be relaxed, and the processes required for chromatin reorganization for the aim of replication or transcription are controlled by ATP-dependent nucleosome remodelers. One of the most highly studied remodelers of this kind is the BRG1- or BRM-associated factor complex (BAF complex, also known as SWItch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) complex), which is crucial for the regulation of gene expression and differentiation in eukaryotes. Chromatin remodeling complex BAF is characterized by a highly polymorphic structure, containing from four to 17 subunits encoded by 29 genes. The aim of this paper is to provide an overview of the role of BAF complex in chromatin remodeling and also to use literature mining and a set of computational and bioinformatics tools to analyze structural properties, intrinsic disorder predisposition, and functionalities of its subunits, along with the description of the relations of different BAF complex subunits to the pathogenesis of various human diseases.

[5] Application of different methodologies for the detection of genetic variants in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders negative for single nucleotide variants
    A TEATINI
    https://thesis.unipd.it/handle/20.500.12608/84106
    snippet: … The first cohort consisted of 100 patients analysed … from this cohort of patients were analysed using VarSeq software to detect CNVs. The most relevant events were genotype-phenotype …

[6] 620988 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620988
    snippet: Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: human genetic and experimental evidences.

[7] DHX9 gene DExH-Box Helicase 9
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.genecards.org/card/DHX9
    snippet: These findings place DHX9 in both neurodevelopmental ... Diseases associated with DHX9 include Intellectual Developmental Disorder, Autosomal Dominant 75 and ...

[8] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … disease traits in OMIM. Using … phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[9] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    PMID:37369308 DOI:10.1016/j.ejmg.2023.104804 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … For statistical analyses of the phenotypic data collected from the Dhx9 mutant flies, … For statistical analysis of the phenotypic data collected from the Dhx9 G416R (p.(Gly414Arg…
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[10] NOVEL DISEASE GENES DISCOVERY AND INNOVATIVE APPROACHES FOR INVESTIGATING NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
    V Pullano (2025)
    https://tesidottorato.depositolegale.it/handle/20.500.14242/202444
    snippet: … the onset of a disease phenotype also in the absence of … and complexity of a disease phenotype are influenced by the … in development triggers the onset of the disease phenotype or …