SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic and phenotypic characterization of NKX6‐2‐related spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, M Alsagob, K Kloth… (2020)
    DOI:10.1111/ene.14082 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ene.14082
    snippet: … variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation … NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination …
    abstract: <h4>Background and purpose</h4>Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders with a wide spectrum of phenotypes and a high rate of genetically unsolved cases. Bi-allelic mutations in NKX6-2 were recently linked to spastic ataxia 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.<h4>Methods</h4>Using a combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing, and detailed clinical and neuroimaging assessment a series of new NKX6-2 mutations in a multicentre setting is described. Then, all reported NKX6-2 mutations and those identified in this study were combined and an in-depth analysis of NKX6-2-related disease spectrum was provided.<h4>Results</h4>Eleven new cases from eight families of different ethnic backgrounds carrying compound heterozygous and homozygous pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 were identified, evidencing a high NKX6-2 mutation burden in the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy disease spectrum. Our data reveal a phenotype spectrum with neonatal onset, global psychomotor delay and worse prognosis at the severe end and a childhood onset with mainly motor phenotype at the milder end. The phenotypic and neuroimaging expression in NKX6-2 is described and it is shown that phenotypes with epilepsy in the absence of overt hypomyelination and diffuse hypomyelination without seizures can occur.<h4>Conclusions</h4>NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in patients with autosomal recessive, very early onset of nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia with hypotonia that rapidly progresses to spasticity, particularly when associated with neuroimaging signs of hypomyelination. Therefore, it is recommended that NXK6-2 should be included in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and spastic ataxia diagnostic panels.

[2] NKX6-2-related disorder
    V Chelban, N Kaya, F Alkuraya, H Houlden (2018)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk531509/
    snippet: … Normal to hyperintense T 1 -weighted white matter signal suggestive of hypomyelination observed in areas corresponding to the T 2 -weighted hyperintense signal change (column 2) …

[3] Maximizing Diagnostic Yield in Intellectual Disability Through Exome Sequencing: Genotype–Phenotype Insights in a Vietnamese Cohort
    TL Hoang, TKP Doan, TNL Hoang, CT Ho, TH Vu… (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/15/22/2821
    snippet: … whose mutations are associated with seizures, motor delays, … mutations in genes, such as NKX6-2, PAH, and SCN2A, where … a broad clinical spectrum ranging from epilepsy to severe …
    abstract: <b>Background</b>: Intellectual disability (ID) is a heterogeneous condition caused by diverse genetic factors, including single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy number variants (CNVs). Whole-exome sequencing (WES) and clinical exome sequencing (CES) have become essential tools for identifying pathogenic variants; however, their relative diagnostic performance in ID has not been fully characterized. <b>Methods</b>: Children diagnosed with ID or related neurodevelopmental disorders underwent WES or CES. Identified variants were classified according to ACMG/AMP and ClinGen guidelines, with segregation analysis performed when parental samples were available. Diagnostic yields were compared across demographic, prenatal, and phenotypic subgroups. A multidimensional semi-quantitative scoring system encompassing 15 clinical domains (e.g., age at onset, neuro-motor function, seizures, MRI findings, vision, and dysmorphic features) was developed. Z-scores were calculated for each parameter, followed by hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) and correlation modeling to define genotype-phenotype associations and pathway-level clustering. <b>Results</b>: A broad spectrum of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants across multiple genes and biological pathways was identified in our study. CNV-associated cases frequently exhibited prenatal anomalies or multisystem phenotypes associated with large chromosomal rearrangements. Monogenic variants and their corresponding phenotypic profiles were identified through clinical exome sequencing (CES) and whole-exome sequencing (WES). Phenotypic HCA based on Z-scores revealed three major biological groups of patients with coherent genotype-phenotype relationships: Group 1, severe multisystem neurodevelopmental disorders dominated by transcriptional and RNA-processing genes (<i>POLR1C, TCF4, HNRNPU, NIPBL, ACTG1</i>); Group 2, intermediate epileptic and metabolic forms associated with ion-channel and excitability-related genes (<i>SCN2A, PAH, IQSEC2, GNPAT</i>); and Group 3, milder or focal neurodevelopmental phenotypes involving myelination and signaling-related genes (<i>NKX6-2, PLP1, PGAP3, SMAD6, ATP1A3</i>). Gene distribution significantly differed among these biological categories (χ<sup>2</sup> = 54.566, df = 34, <i>p</i> = 0.0141), confirming non-random, biologically consistent grouping. Higher Z-scores correlated with earlier onset and greater neurological severity, underscoring the clinical relevance of the multidimensio

[4] Transcriptomic profiling of high-and low-spiking regions reveals novel epileptogenic mechanisms in focal cortical dysplasia type II patients
    A Srivastava, K Kumar, J Banerjee, M Tripathi, V Dubey… (2021)
    PMID:34301297 DOI:10.1186/s13041-021-00832-4 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13041-021-00832-4
    snippet: … -epilepsy controls for such studies involving epilepsy surgery, … without any history of seizures or other neurological disorders … MOG, NKX6-2 and MOBP) were found to be significantly up-…
    abstract: Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) is a malformation of the cerebral cortex with poorly-defined epileptogenic zones (EZs), and poor surgical outcome in FCD is associated with inaccurate localization of the EZ. Hence, identifying novel epileptogenic markers to aid in the localization of EZ in patients with FCD is very much needed. High-throughput gene expression studies of FCD samples have the potential to uncover molecular changes underlying the epileptogenic process and identify novel markers for delineating the EZ. For this purpose, we, for the first time performed RNA sequencing of surgically resected paired tissue samples obtained from electrocorticographically graded high (MAX) and low spiking (MIN) regions of FCD type II patients and autopsy controls. We identified significant changes in the MAX samples of the FCD type II patients when compared to non-epileptic controls, but not in the case of MIN samples. We found significant enrichment for myelination, oligodendrocyte development and differentiation, neuronal and axon ensheathment, phospholipid metabolism, cell adhesion and cytoskeleton, semaphorins, and ion channels in the MAX region. Through the integration of both MAX vs non-epileptic control and MAX vs MIN RNA sequencing (RNA Seq) data, PLP1, PLLP, UGT8, KLK6, SOX10, MOG, MAG, MOBP, ANLN, ERMN, SPP1, CLDN11, TNC, GPR37, SLC12A2, ABCA2, ABCA8, ASPA, P2RX7, CERS2, MAP4K4, TF, CTGF, Semaphorins, Opalin, FGFs, CALB2, and TNC were identified as potential key regulators of multiple pathways related to FCD type II pathology. We have identified novel epileptogenic marker elements that may contribute to epileptogenicity in patients with FCD and could be possible markers for the localization of EZ.

[5] Mutations in NKX6-2 cause progressive spastic ataxia and hypomyelination
    V Chelban, N Patel, J Vandrovcova, MN Zanetti… (2017)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(17)30196-9
    snippet: … NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination… features, such as epilepsy, cognitive decline…
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[6] Seizures - Symptoms and causes
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:42246053 DOI:10.3389/fneur.2026.1793970 https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/seizure/symptoms-causes/syc-20365711
    snippet: Gene changes cause some types of seizures. Epilepsy is a common cause of seizures. But not everyone who has a seizure has epilepsy. Sometimes ...
    abstract: Seizures are symptoms of epilepsy but spontaneous seizure recurrence can also be considered a biomarker of disease progression. The temporary imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory drive that culminates in a hyperexcitable, hypersynchronous state clinically observed as seizure, initiates an insidious cascade of neurochemical, structural, genetic, epigenetic, and neuroinflammatory processes that increases seizure frequency, duration, and severity. As seizure activity increases, the hyperexcitable and hypersynchronous states entrain neuronal networks, leading to a further reduction in seizure threshold and further increases in seizure frequency, duration, and severity over time. The pathological circuitry generated and sustained by epileptic events not only drive hyperexcitable states within the seizure circuit but also can affect wider network connections. These effects lead to altered network physiology, which is associated with neuropsychiatric comorbidities, such as cognitive decline and psychiatric disorders, and can impact the operation of other organ systems. Here, we review the current understanding of how seizures can hijack normal brain function and set off a cascade of pathobiological events that support continued seizure activity and epilepsy progression. Understanding the neurobiology of seizure progression is fundamental to building comprehensive treatment strategies and developing new pharmacotherapies that aim to retrain seizure circuitry, with the goal of reducing overall seizure burden, improving quality of life, and limiting disease progression.

[7] Seizure: What It Is, Causes, Symptoms, Treatment & Types
    (authors not shown)
    https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22789-seizure
    snippet: These seizures are the primary symptom of epilepsy. Advertisement. Seizures without a known cause are called idiopathic seizures. Seizure ...

[8] Types of Seizures | Epilepsy
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.cdc.gov/epilepsy/about/types-of-seizures.html
    snippet: Epilepsy is a broad term used for a brain disorder that causes seizures. There are many different types of epilepsy. View All · For Everyone.

[9] Seizures: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
    (authors not shown)
    https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003200.htm
    snippet: If seizures continue repeatedly after any underlying problem is treated, the condition is called epilepsy. Home Care.

[10] Acute Symptomatic Seizures Caused by Electrolyte ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:26754778 DOI:10.3988/jcn.2016.12.1.21 PMC4712283 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4712283/
    snippet: by R Nardone · 2015 · Cited by 357 — Seizures occurring as a consequence of electrolyte imbalance do not entail a diagnosis of epilepsy, but are currently classified as acute symptomatic seizures.
    abstract: In this narrative review we focus on acute symptomatic seizures occurring in subjects with electrolyte disturbances. Quite surprisingly, despite its clinical relevance, this issue has received very little attention in the scientific literature. Electrolyte abnormalities are commonly encountered in clinical daily practice, and their diagnosis relies on routine laboratory findings. Acute and severe electrolyte imbalances can manifest with seizures, which may be the sole presenting symptom. Seizures are more frequently observed in patients with sodium disorders (especially hyponatremia), hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia. They do not entail a diagnosis of epilepsy, but are classified as acute symptomatic seizures. EEG has little specificity in differentiating between various electrolyte disturbances. The prominent EEG feature is slowing of the normal background activity, although other EEG findings, including various epileptiform abnormalities may occur. An accurate and prompt diagnosis should be established for a successful management of seizures, as rapid identification and correction of the underlying electrolyte disturbance (rather than an antiepileptic treatment) are of crucial importance in the control of seizures and prevention of permanent brain damage.