SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … in the FILIP1 gene cause a novel autosomal recessive arthrogryposis phenotype with microcephaly. … in combination with microcephaly in our patients strongly support that FILIP1 plays …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[2] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … existence of FILIP1-related arthrogryposis with microcephaly, … FILIP1-related congenital neuromuscular disorder with … exhibit other phenotypes (microcephaly, sensorineural hearing loss…
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[3] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … disease ‘arthrogryposis’. Initial analysis using 115 genes on the arthrogryposis panel v2.29 (… features indicative of neurogenic or myopathic arthrogryposis. As these features would not …

[4] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2022)
    https://europepmc.org/article/ppr/ppr556969
    snippet: … and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of …
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[5] … loss-of-function variants of FILIP1 encoding a filamin A binding protein cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler… (2024)
    https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/publications/bi-allelic-loss-of-function-variants-of-filip1-encoding-a-filamin/
    snippet: Bi-allelic loss-of-function variants of FILIP1 encoding a filamin A binding protein cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly - Research …

[6] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10060356 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10060356/
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Franziska Schnabel ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[7] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://edoc.mdc-berlin.de/id/eprint/23222/
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly ; Arthrogryposis, Carrier Proteins, ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[8] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Homozygous-loss-of-function-variants-in-FILIP1-with-Schnabel-Schuler/6713bf46949350571fddd797022d5ad5369508cd
    snippet: Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly · 4 Citations · 27 References.
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[9] FILIP1
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/entities/FILIP1?tag=watchlist
    snippet: Phenotypes. FILIP1-related arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Green FILIP1 in Intellectual disability. Level 2: Developmental disorders

[10] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://squ.elsevierpure.com/en/publications/homozygous-loss-of-function-variants-in-filip1-cause-autosomal-re/
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly. Franziska Schnabel; , Elisabeth ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>