SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Further delineation of the SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder
    CM Schmid, A Gregor, A Ruiz… (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01760-2
    snippet: … with variable neurodevelopmental phenotypes, including mild intellectual disability, seizures… additional individuals carrying a SCAF4 variant and with intellectual disability, epilepsy, and …
    abstract: While mostly de novo truncating variants in SCAF4 were recently identified in 18 individuals with variable neurodevelopmental phenotypes, knowledge on the molecular and clinical spectrum is still limited. We assembled data on 50 novel individuals with SCAF4 variants ascertained via GeneMatcher and personal communication. With detailed evaluation of clinical data, in silico predictions and structural modeling, we further characterized the molecular and clinical spectrum of the autosomal dominant SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder. The molecular spectrum comprises 25 truncating, eight splice-site and five missense variants. While all other truncating variants were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, significance of one C-terminal truncating variant, one splice-site variant and the missense variants remained unclear. Three missense variants in the CTD-interacting domain of SCAF4 were predicted to destabilize the domain. Twenty-three variants occurred de novo, and variants were inherited in 13 cases. Frequent clinical findings were mild developmental delay with speech impairment, seizures, and skeletal abnormalities such as clubfoot, scoliosis or hip dysplasia. Cognitive abilities ranged from normal IQ to severe intellectual disability (ID), with borderline to mild ID in the majority of individuals. Our study confirms the role of SCAF4 variants in neurodevelopmental disorders and further delineates the associated clinical phenotype.

[2] Rolle des Transkriptionsregulators PHF6 und des Transkriptionsterminators SCAF4 bei Entwicklungsstörungen
    A Fliedner
    https://open.fau.de/bitstreams/f40a0227-9d48-4595-93f1-bfef2148013e/download
    snippet: … pathogenic variants in SCAF4, truncating … phenotypic features included mild intellectual disability, severely delayed speech development, epilepsy and behavioural anomalies. SCAF4 …

[3] Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder and are associated with impaired mRNA processing
    A Fliedner, P Kirchner, A Wiesener… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30228-7
    snippet: … implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In … Taken together, likely gene-disruptive variants in SCAF4 are … developmental delay and intellectual disability and …
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[4] Roles of Transcriptional Regulator PHF6 and Transcriptional Terminator SCAF4 in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    A Fliedner (2021)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/551ce428590f754704e579472ecaea1a/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2026366&diss=y
    snippet: … pathogenic variants in SCAF4, truncating … phenotypic features included mild intellectual disability, severely delayed speech development, epilepsy and behavioural anomalies. SCAF4 …

[5] Genes associated with disturbed cerebral neurogenesis in the embryonic brain of mouse models of Down syndrome
    K Ishihara (2021)
    PMID:34680993 DOI:10.3390/genes12101598 https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/10/1598
    snippet: … Intellectual disability is characterized by impaired cognitive … exhibit a number of neural phenotypes affecting learning, memory, … approximately 70 genes from Scaf4 to Zbtb21 in Mmu16, …
    abstract: Down syndrome (DS), also known as trisomy 21, is the most frequent genetic cause of intellectual disability. Although the mechanism remains unknown, delayed brain development is assumed to be involved in DS intellectual disability. Analyses with human with DS and mouse models have shown that defects in embryonic cortical neurogenesis may lead to delayed brain development. Cre-loxP-mediated chromosomal engineering has allowed the generation of a variety of mouse models carrying various partial Mmu16 segments. These mouse models are useful for determining genotype-phenotype correlations and identifying dosage-sensitive genes involved in the impaired neurogenesis. In this review, we summarize several candidate genes and pathways that have been linked to defective cortical neurogenesis in DS.

[6] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC7477272 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7477272/
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — Keywords: SCAF4, neurodevelopmental disorder, mRNA processing, intellectual disability, seizures, epilepsy ... cognitive impairments seen ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[7] SCAF4 variants associated with focal epilepsy ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:37394306 DOI:10.1016/j.seizure.2023.06.018 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1059131123001772
    snippet: by H Lin · 2024 · Cited by 5 — L M L Carvalho, C F Pinto, M De Oliveira Scliar, et al. SCAF4-related syndromic intellectual disability. Am J Med Genet A, 191 (2) (2023), pp. 570-574.
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>The SCAF4 gene encodes serine/arginine-related carboxyl-terminal domain-associated factor 4, which is highly expressed in the brain and potentially affects neurodevelopment. However, the functional significance of SCAF4 variants in human diseases remains unknown.<h4>Methods</h4>Trio-based whole-exome sequencing was performed in three individuals with focal epilepsy. Bioinformatics tools were used to assess the pathogenicity of SCAF4 variants. Knockout scaf4a/b zebrafish were created using CRISPR-Cas9 used to validate the phenotype.<h4>Results</h4>SCAF4 variants were identified in three individuals from three unrelated families with focal epilepsy. All patients had focal seizures and focal discharges on EEG recordings, with intellectual disability or motor retardation, skeletal abnormalities, and one had cryptorchidism. However, no recurrence was observed after short-term ASMs treatment. The identified SCAF4 variants included two nonsense variants and one compound heterozygous variant, consisting of a missense and an in-frame variant. A low frequency of SCAF4 variants was observed in gnomAD in this study. Computational modelling has suggested that missense variants lead to functional impairments. In zebrafish, abnormal epileptiform signals, skeletal development, and neurodevelopment have been found in scaf4a/b knockout compared to wild-type zebrafish.<h4>Conclusion</h4>These results indicate that SCAF4 is associated with focal epilepsy accompanied by multisystem disorders. Otherwise, the management of patients with SCAF4 variants requires more attention to multisystem involvement.

[8] Further delineation of the SCAF4-associated ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://ourarchive.otago.ac.nz/esploro/outputs/journalArticle/Further-delineation-of-the-SCAF4-associated-neurodevelopmental/9926664422401891
    snippet: ... SCAF4 variants in neurodevelopmental disorders ... Cognitive abilities ranged from normal IQ to severe intellectual disability ... phenotype. Expand ...
    abstract: While mostly de novo truncating variants in SCAF4 were recently identified in 18 individuals with variable neurodevelopmental phenotypes, knowledge on the molecular and clinical spectrum is still limited. We assembled data on 50 novel individuals with SCAF4 variants ascertained via GeneMatcher and personal communication. With detailed evaluation of clinical data, in silico predictions and structural modeling, we further characterized the molecular and clinical spectrum of the autosomal dominant SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder. The molecular spectrum comprises 25 truncating, eight splice-site and five missense variants. While all other truncating variants were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, significance of one C-terminal truncating variant, one splice-site variant and the missense variants remained unclear. Three missense variants in the CTD-interacting domain of SCAF4 were predicted to destabilize the domain. Twenty-three variants occurred de novo, and variants were inherited in 13 cases. Frequent clinical findings were mild developmental delay with speech impairment, seizures, and skeletal abnormalities such as clubfoot, scoliosis or hip dysplasia. Cognitive abilities ranged from normal IQ to severe intellectual disability (ID), with borderline to mild ID in the majority of individuals. Our study confirms the role of SCAF4 variants in neurodevelopmental disorders and further delineates the associated clinical phenotype.

[9] SCAF4 variants are associated with epilepsy with neurodevelopmental disorders
    Y Hu, B Zhang, L Chen, J He, L Yang… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S105913112300273X
    snippet: … analysed by doctors based on the IQ test. Brain magnetic resonance … that SCAF4 is involved in the process of mRNA splicing (Fliedner [6])… Scaf4-related syndromic intellectual disability …
    abstract: <h4>Aims</h4>The genetic causes of epilepsy with unknown etiology in most patients remain unknown. The aim of this study was to elucidate the phenotype of SCAF4-related epilepsy.<h4>Methods</h4>Trio-based whole-exome sequencing was performed in patients with epilepsy. Silico programs and protein modeling were employed to predict the damaging of variants. Previously reported SCAF4 variants were systematically reviewed to analyze the genotype-phenotype correlations.<h4>Results</h4>Three heterozygous variants in the SCAF4 were detected in three cases, including one missense variant and two frameshift variants. All variants were de novo. None of these variants is present in gnomAD controls. The missense variant was predicted to be damaging in silico tools. Protein modeling showed that two frameshift variants resulted in loss of domains, and the missense variant may disrupt a nearby phosphorylation site and alter the hydrogen bonds around 54C and the stability of the SCAF4 protein. Intellectual development was mildly delayed for all patients except for one with whom contact was lost. All probands experienced epilepsy as infrequent seizures, responded well to antiseizure drugs, and had a median [IQR] seizure onset age of 4 [1.75, 7.5] years. The variants in the domain-encoding exons and upstream exons exhibited a strong association with epilepsy.<h4>Conclusions</h4>SCAF4 is a potential causative gene of epilepsy with neurodevelopmental disorders.

[10] A novel nonsense mutation in SCAF4 associated with fliedner ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12021868 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12021868/
    snippet: Variants in the SR-related C-terminal domain-Associated factor 4 (SCAF4) gene are linked to Fliedner-Zweier syndrome (FZS), which presents with ...
    abstract: <h4>Introduction</h4>Variants in the SR-related C-terminal domain-Associated factor 4 (SCAF4) gene are linked to Fliedner-Zweier syndrome (FZS), which presents with diverse symptoms, including mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. However, there is a paucity of cases describing genotypes and clinical features.<h4>Case presentation</h4>We present the case of a 4-year and seven-month-old Chinese boy displaying intellectual impairment, language development disorder, behavioral abnormalities, and distinct facial features. Whole exome sequencing (WES) identified a heterozygous nonsense mutation, c.1693C>T (p.Arg565*), located in exon 14 of the SCAF4 gene (NM_020706). Sanger sequencing confirmed paternal inheritance of this mutation. RNA sequencing from the patient demonstrated widespread transcriptional dysregulation, reinforcing the role of SCAF4 dysfunction in impaired transcription and neurodevelopmental disorders. This mutation is novel, not previously recorded in databases such as GnomAD or dbSNP, nor reported in existing literature.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We reviewed the clinical features of the patients reported in the literature with mutations in SCAF4 gene and described the case of a Chinese patient with this mutation. This case underscores the critical need for continued exploration of genotype-phenotype correlations, enhancing our understanding of the diverse manifestations of Fliedner-Zweier syndrome and informing future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.