SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic Requirements for Building a Brain of a Sufficent Size: Insights From Mendelian Congenital Microcephaly Disorders
    C Brown (2017)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/33f3ed2382bfa95071e2e15af6de55f4/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750
    snippet: Congenital microcephaly (conMiC) is a manifestation of severely disrupted prenatal brain development, caused by genetic defects, toxins, severe maternal malnutrition, or infection. The …

[2] Advancing the clinical and molecular understanding of cornelia de lange syndrome: A multidisciplinary pediatric case series and review of the literature
    K Gruca (2024)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: … head circumference are lower than standard growth curves. Most individuals were below the 5th percentile for growth in all parameters and had microcephaly. … MAU2 interacts with the …

[3] Microdeletions at 19p13. 11p12 in five individuals with neurodevelopmental delay
    M Rieger, S Moutton, S Verheyen, K Steindl… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721222002506
    snippet: … In the literature, a de novo in-frame deletion in MAU2 was … individual and the encompassment of MAU2 in three individuals' … point, microcephaly (P2, P3) or head circumference in the …

[4] CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME AND RELATED DISORDERS: NEW INSIGHTS INTO GLOBAL TRANSCRIPTIONAL DISTURBANCES DUE TO MUTATIONS IN …
    I Parenti (2016)
    https://tesidottorato.depositolegale.it/handle/20.500.14242/75793
    snippet: … head circumference can reach the average value of 49 cm, consistent with a significant microcephaly … The second component of the cohesin-loader complex MAU2 is characterized by …

[5] Heterozygous loss-of-function SMC3 variants are associated with variable growth and developmental features
    M Ansari, KNW Faour, A Shimamura, G Grimes… (2024)
    PMID:38297832 DOI:10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100273 https://www.cell.com/hgg-advances/fulltext/S2666-2477(24)00012-5
    snippet: … intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, and postnatal growth delay.… head circumference, postnatal (ie, at time of enrollment) weight, and postnatal head circumference …
    abstract: Heterozygous missense variants and in-frame indels in SMC3 are a cause of Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS), marked by intellectual disability, growth deficiency, and dysmorphism, via an apparent dominant-negative mechanism. However, the spectrum of manifestations associated with SMC3 loss-of-function variants has not been reported, leading to hypotheses of alternative phenotypes or even developmental lethality. We used matchmaking servers, patient registries, and other resources to identify individuals with heterozygous, predicted loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in SMC3, and analyzed population databases to characterize mutational intolerance in this gene. Here, we show that SMC3 behaves as an archetypal haploinsufficient gene: it is highly constrained against pLoF variants, strongly depleted for missense variants, and pLoF variants are associated with a range of developmental phenotypes. Among 14 individuals with SMC3 pLoF variants, phenotypes were variable but coalesced on low growth parameters, developmental delay/intellectual disability, and dysmorphism, reminiscent of atypical CdLS. Comparisons to individuals with SMC3 missense/in-frame indel variants demonstrated an overall milder presentation in pLoF carriers. Furthermore, several individuals harboring pLoF variants in SMC3 were nonpenetrant for growth, developmental, and/or dysmorphic features, and some had alternative symptomatologies with rational biological links to SMC3. Analyses of tumor and model system transcriptomic data and epigenetic data in a subset of cases suggest that SMC3 pLoF variants reduce SMC3 expression but do not strongly support clustering with functional genomic signatures of typical CdLS. Our finding of substantial population-scale LoF intolerance in concert with variable growth and developmental features in subjects with SMC3 pLoF variants expands the scope of cohesinopathies, informs on their allelic architecture, and suggests the existence of additional clearly LoF-constrained genes whose disease links will be confirmed only by multilayered genomic data paired with careful phenotyping.

[6] Cornelia de Lange syndrome as paradigm of chromatinopathies
    I Parenti, FJ Kaiser (2021)
    DOI:10.3389/fnins.2021.774950/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2021.774950/full
    snippet: Chromatinopathies can be defined as a class of neurodevelopmental disorders caused by mutations affecting proteins responsible for chromatin remodeling and transcriptional regulation. The resulting dysregulation of gene expression favors the onset of a series of clinical features such as developmental delay, intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism, and behavioral disturbances. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a prime example of a chromatinopathy. It is caused by mutations affecting subunits or regulators of the cohesin …

[7] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: by I Parenti · 2026 · Cited by 3 — The syndrome is characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, along with developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[8] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 lead ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.11.16.25339042 PMC12668068 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12668068/
    snippet: Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features.
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While  NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of  MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous  MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. MAU2 in-frame variants predominantly impair NIPBL–MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause  MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most patients exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also identified two  MAU2 -specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features. A heterozygous  Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulated these traits, confirming the causal role of  MAU2 disruption  in vivo. Our study establishes  MAU2 as a new CdLS-associated gene and delineates a  MAU2 -related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[9] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8223&context=papers
    snippet: The syndrome is characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, along with developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[10] 621570 - CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 7; CDLS7
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621570
    snippet: Cornelia de Lange syndrome-7 ・ is an autosomal dominant disorder ・ with short stature and microcephaly as major features (summary by Parenti