SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The evolving spectrum of complex inherited neuropathies
    AM Rossor, S Haddad… (2024)
    PMC11377048 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11377048/
    snippet: … In addition to a histopathological signature, brain MRI in NIID … dimorphism, agenesis of the corpus callosum, death in first … variants in NARS1 cause neurodevelopmental delay due to …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose of review</h4>Inherited peripheral neuropathies can be divided into those diseases in which peripheral neuropathy is the sole or main feature of the disease (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease) and those in which peripheral neuropathy is just one feature of a more complex syndrome. In recent years there has been a substantial expansion in the number of genes associated with complex neuropathy syndromes.<h4>Recent findings</h4>This review will focus on emerging themes in this group of diseases, namely the increasing number of diseases due to repeat expansions; the emergence of both recessive and dominant negative alleles in the same gene producing a common phenotype and diseases in which there is selective loss of the allele from haematopoietic stem cells making genetic diagnosis on blood derived DNA problematic.<h4>Summary</h4>In this review we provide a practical approach to investigating and diagnosing patients with peripheral neuropathy as part of a complex syndrome and provide an updated table of the genes associated with this group of diseases.

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … The yellow arrow indicates a thin corpus callosum. Red arrows indicate cerebellar atrophy. Yellow arrowheads show enlargement of the ventricles, and yellow asterisks (brain MRI, sec…
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] Axonal motor polyneuropathy in a 13 years old Girl with a de Novo variant in ADNP
    S Scaccini, CA Cesaroni, SG Caraffi, S Rizzi, S Rosato… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10048-025-00815-w
    snippet: … Brain MRI, performed at two years of age, showed global reduction of the supratentorial white matter, volumetric reduction of the middle third of the corpus callosum… neurodevelopmental …
    abstract: ADNP-Related Disorder [previously known as Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome (HVDAS)] is a rare genetic condition resulting from mutations in the activity-dependent neuroprotector homeobox (ADNP) gene. The ADNP protein has multiple functions, including serving as an essential transcription factor for brain development. In addition, pathogenic variants in ADNP have been recognized as one of the most frequent monogenic causes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability. Clinical features include craniofacial dysmorphisms, congenital heart defects, gastrointestinal problems such as feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux and frequent vomiting, vision problems, recurrent infections and seizures. Here we describe the novel case of a girl who came to our attention in infancy because of poor and stereotyped motor repertoire, repetitive purposeless movements, and intellectual disability. Whole exome sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous variant in the ADNP gene, leading to the diagnosis of HVDAS at age 5 years. At the age of 12, nerve conduction velocity testing showed severe four-limb axonal motor polyneuropathy. In this article, we would like to focus on the presence of peripheral nervous system involvement associated with the pathogenic ADNP de novo variant, which may contribute to the clinical characterization of ADNP-Related Disorder.

[4] Paralog studies augment gene discovery: DDX and DHX genes
    I Paine, JE Posey, CM Grochowski… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30226-5
    snippet: … presented with agenesis of the corpus callosum, seizures, and … characteristic of neurodevelopmental conditions associated with … on the most recent brain MRI which was taken at …
    abstract: Members of a paralogous gene family in which variation in one gene is known to cause disease are eight times more likely to also be associated with human disease. Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in paralogous genes encoding members of the DExD/H-box RNA helicase superfamily might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease phenotypes. Here we describe 15 unrelated individuals who have DD and/or ID, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H-box RNA helicase genes. In addition, these individuals exhibit a variety of other tissue and organ system involvement including ocular, outer ear, hearing, cardiac, and kidney tissues. Five individuals with homozygous (one), compound-heterozygous (two), or de novo (two) missense variants in DHX37 were identified by exome sequencing. We identified ten total individuals with missense variants in three other DDX/DHX paralogs: DHX16 (four individuals), DDX54 (three individuals), and DHX34 (three individuals). Most identified variants are rare, predicted to be damaging, and occur at conserved amino acid residues. Taken together, these 15 individuals implicate the DExD/H-box helicases in both dominantly and recessively inherited neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlight the potential for more than one disease mechanism underlying these disorders.

[5] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … atrophy and thinning of the corpus callosum on MRI.Taken … Fifteen subjects underwent brain MRI. Brain imaging was … in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.

[6] Activity
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/activity/?panel=285&entity=CIT
    snippet: Sarah Leigh reviewed gene: DHX9: Rating: GREEN; Mode of pathogenicity ... Brain MRI revealed corpus callosum anomalies (2/2) and cerebral atrophy (2/2) ...

[7] Exome Sequencing Reveals Novel Variants and Expands ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/12/2014
    snippet: by M Dawidziuk · 2021 · Cited by 22 — DHX9: In patient T91 with SM (−2.8 SD), corpus callosum dysgenesis, DD ... brain MRI studies. Three patients were found with strabismus, which ...
    abstract: Congenital microcephaly causes smaller than average head circumference relative to age, sex and ethnicity and is most usually associated with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders. The underlying etiology is highly heterogeneous and can be either environmental or genetic. Disruption of any one of multiple biological processes, such as those underlying neurogenesis, cell cycle and division, DNA repair or transcription regulation, can result in microcephaly. This etiological heterogeneity manifests in a clinical variability and presents a major diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, leaving an unacceptably large proportion of over half of microcephaly patients without molecular diagnosis. To elucidate the clinical and genetic landscapes of congenital microcephaly, we sequenced the exomes of 191 clinically diagnosed patients with microcephaly as one of the features. We established a molecular basis for microcephaly in 71 patients (37%), and detected novel variants in five high confidence candidate genes previously unassociated with this condition. We report a large number of patients with mutations in tubulin-related genes in our cohort as well as higher incidence of pathogenic mutations in <i>MCPH</i> genes. Our study expands the phenotypic and genetic landscape of microcephaly, facilitating differential clinical diagnoses for disorders associated with most commonly disrupted genes in our cohort.

[8] DDX3X syndrome : Journal of Neurochemistry
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1111/jnc.16174 https://www.ovid.com/journals/jneur/fulltext/10.1111/jnc.16174~ddx3x-syndrome-from-clinical-phenotypes-to-biological
    snippet: ... corpus callosum (27% in PMG vs. 1% in non‐PMG) ... brain MRI scan (Lennox et al., 2020 ; Parra et al ... Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the.
    abstract: DDX3X syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder accounting for up to 3% of cases of intellectual disability (ID) and affecting primarily females. Individuals diagnosed with DDX3X syndrome can also present with behavioral challenges, motor delays and movement disorders, epilepsy, and congenital malformations. DDX3X syndrome is caused by mutations in the X-linked gene DDX3X, which encodes a DEAD-box RNA helicase with critical roles in RNA metabolism, including mRNA translation. Emerging discoveries from animal models are unveiling a fundamental role of DDX3X in neuronal differentiation and development, especially in the neocortex. Here, we review the current knowledge of genetic and neurobiological mechanisms underlying DDX3X syndrome and their relationship with clinical phenotypes.

[9] Structural brain abnormalities in a single gene disorder associated with epilepsy, language impairment and intellectual disability
    J Bathelt, D Astle, J Barnes, FL Raymond, K Baker (2016)
    PMID:27747153 DOI:10.1016/j.nicl.2016.07.016 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221315821630136X
    snippet: … In the current study, we extended these initial observations by measuring the impact of ZDHHC9 mutation on brain organisation using MRI focussing on global and regional cortical …
    abstract: Childhood speech and language deficits are highly prevalent and are a common feature of neurodevelopmental disorders. However, it is difficult to investigate the underlying causal pathways because many diagnostic groups have a heterogeneous aetiology. Studying disorders with a shared genetic cause and shared cognitive deficits can provide crucial insight into the cellular mechanisms and neural systems that give rise to those impairments. The current study investigated structural brain differences of individuals with mutations in <i>ZDHHC9</i>, which is associated with a specific neurodevelopmental phenotype including prominent speech and language impairments and intellectual disability. We used multiple structural neuroimaging methods to characterise neuroanatomy in this group, and observed bilateral reductions in cortical thickness in areas surrounding the temporo-parietal junction, parietal lobule, and inferior frontal lobe, and decreased microstructural integrity of cortical, subcortical-cortical, and interhemispheric white matter projections. These findings are compared to reports for other genetic groups and genetically heterogeneous disorders with a similar presentation. Overlap in the neuroanatomical phenotype suggests a common pathway that particularly affects the development of temporo-parietal and inferior frontal areas, and their connections.

[10] Germline Chd8 haploinsufficiency alters brain development in mouse
    AL Gompers, L Su (2017)
    PMID:28671691 DOI:10.1038/nn.4592 https://www.nature.com/articles/nn.4592
    snippet: … 1g), and no overt neuropathological anomalies were … del5 adult brain structure via MRI Intact brains were collected … spliceosomal E complex (Srsf7 and Dhx9), and lariat formation and 5…
    abstract: The chromatin remodeling gene CHD8 represents a central node in neurodevelopmental gene networks implicated in autism. We examined the impact of germline heterozygous frameshift Chd8 mutation on neurodevelopment in mice. Chd8<sup>+/del5</sup> mice displayed normal social interactions with no repetitive behaviors but exhibited cognitive impairment correlated with increased regional brain volume, validating that phenotypes of Chd8<sup>+/del5</sup> mice overlap pathology reported in humans with CHD8 mutations. We applied network analysis to characterize neurodevelopmental gene expression, revealing widespread transcriptional changes in Chd8<sup>+/del5</sup> mice across pathways disrupted in neurodevelopmental disorders, including neurogenesis, synaptic processes and neuroimmune signaling. We identified a co-expression module with peak expression in early brain development featuring dysregulation of RNA processing, chromatin remodeling and cell-cycle genes enriched for promoter binding by Chd8, and we validated increased neuronal proliferation and developmental splicing perturbation in Chd8<sup>+/del5</sup> mice. This integrative analysis offers an initial picture of the consequences of Chd8 haploinsufficiency for brain development.