SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Molecular basis of rare diseases associated to the maturation of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S]-containing proteins
    F Camponeschi, S Ciofi (2022)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2218-273X/12/7/1009
    snippet: … Metabolic investigations showed a mild increase in lactate and glycine concentrations in CSF and blood [79]. Biochemical studies revealed decreased protein levels and activity of …
    abstract: The importance of mitochondria in mammalian cells is widely known. Several biochemical reactions and pathways take place within mitochondria: among them, there are those involving the biogenesis of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters. The latter are evolutionarily conserved, ubiquitous inorganic cofactors, performing a variety of functions, such as electron transport, enzymatic catalysis, DNA maintenance, and gene expression regulation. The synthesis and distribution of Fe-S clusters are strictly controlled cellular processes that involve several mitochondrial proteins that specifically interact each other to form a complex machinery (Iron Sulfur Cluster assembly machinery, ISC machinery hereafter). This machinery ensures the correct assembly of both [2Fe-2S] and [4Fe-4S] clusters and their insertion in the mitochondrial target proteins. The present review provides a structural and molecular overview of the rare diseases associated with the genes encoding for the accessory proteins of the ISC machinery (i.e., GLRX5, ISCA1, ISCA2, IBA57, FDX2, BOLA3, IND1 and NFU1) involved in the assembly and insertion of [4Fe-4S] clusters in mitochondrial proteins. The disease-related missense mutations were mapped on the 3D structures of these accessory proteins or of their protein complexes, and the possible impact that these mutations have on their specific activity/function in the frame of the mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] protein biogenesis is described.

[2] A review of radiation-induced alterations of multi-omic profiles, radiation injury biomarkers, and countermeasures
    SK Shakyawar, NK Mishra… (2023)
    PMID:36368026 DOI:10.1667/rade-21-00187.1 https://radiation-research.kglmeridian.com/view/journals/rare/199/1/article-p89.xml
    snippet: … Gy) and the increased replication rate in tumor cells act in … A, guanylate cyclase, and glycine amidinotransferase, which … stimulating factor (G-CSF) pharmacokinetics and subsequently …
    abstract: Increasing utilization of nuclear power enhances the risks associated with industrial accidents, occupational hazards, and the threat of nuclear terrorism. Exposure to ionizing radiation interferes with genomic stability and gene expression resulting in the disruption of normal metabolic processes in cells and organs by inducing complex biological responses. Exposure to high-dose radiation causes acute radiation syndrome, which leads to hematopoietic, gastrointestinal, cerebrovascular, and many other organ-specific injuries. Altered genomic variations, gene expression, metabolite concentrations, and microbiota profiles in blood plasma or tissue samples reflect the whole-body radiation injuries. Hence, multi-omic profiles obtained from high-resolution omics platforms offer a holistic approach for identifying reliable biomarkers to predict the radiation injury of organs and tissues resulting from radiation exposures. In this review, we performed a literature search to systematically catalog the radiation-induced alterations from multi-omic studies and radiation countermeasures. We covered radiation-induced changes in the genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, lipidomic, and microbiome profiles. Furthermore, we have covered promising multi-omic biomarkers, FDA-approved countermeasure drugs, and other radiation countermeasures that include radioprotectors and radiomitigators. This review presents an overview of radiation-induced alterations of multi-omics profiles and biomarkers, and associated radiation countermeasures.

[3] Clinical, radiological, biochemical and molecular characterization of a new case with multiple mitochondrial dysfunction syndrome due to IBA57: lysine and …
    P Wongkittichote, C Pantano, E Bogush… (2023)
    PMID:37903659 DOI:10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107710 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1096719223003402
    snippet: … Hyperlactatemia and elevated plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glycine levels reflect … In addition to increased plasma glycine level, we also identified increased 2-ketoadipic (2-KAA…
    abstract: Iron‑sulfur clusters (FeS) are one of the most primitive and ubiquitous cofactors used by various enzymes in multiple pathways. Biosynthesis of FeS is a complex multi-step process that is tightly regulated and requires multiple machineries. IBA57, along with ISCA1 and ISCA2, play a role in maturation of [4Fe-4S] clusters which are required for multiple mitochondrial enzymes including mitochondrial Complex I, Complex II, lipoic acid synthase, and aconitase. Pathogenic variants in IBA57 have been associated with multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 3 (MMDS3) characterized by infantile to early childhood-onset psychomotor regression, optic atrophy and nonspecific dysmorphism. Here we report a female proband who had prenatal involvement including IUGR and microcephaly and developed subacute psychomotor regression at the age of 5 weeks in the setting of preceding viral infection. Brain imaging revealed cortical malformation with polymicrogyria and abnormal signal alteration in brainstem and spinal cord. Biochemical analysis revealed increased plasma glycine and hyperexcretion of multiple organic acids in urine, raising the concern for lipoic acid biosynthesis defects and mitochondrial FeS assembly defects. Molecular analysis subsequently detected compound heterozygous variants in IBA57, confirming the diagnosis of MMDS3. Although the number of MMDS3 patients are limited, certain degree of genotype-phenotype correlation has been observed. Unusual brain imaging in the proband highlights the need to include mitochondrial disorders as differential diagnoses of structural brain abnormalities. Lastly, in addition to previously known biomarkers including high blood lactate and plasma glycine levels, the increase of 2-hydroxyadipic and 2-ketoadipic acids in urine organic acid analysis, in the appropriate clinical context, should prompt an evaluation for the lipoic acid biosynthesis defects and mitochondrial FeS assembly defects.

[4] Nuclear and radiological emergencies: biological effects, countermeasures and biodosimetry
    E Obrador, R Salvador (2022)
    PMID:35739995 DOI:10.3390/antiox11061098 https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3921/11/6/1098
    snippet: … emits radiation at a high dose rate for a brief timeframe; … -CSF can be used as an alternative to G-CSF, with the advantage that it can be administered weekly (daily in the case of G-CSF), …
    abstract: Atomic and radiological crises can be caused by accidents, military activities, terrorist assaults involving atomic installations, the explosion of nuclear devices, or the utilization of concealed radiation exposure devices. Direct damage is caused when radiation interacts directly with cellular components. Indirect effects are mainly caused by the generation of reactive oxygen species due to radiolysis of water molecules. Acute and persistent oxidative stress associates to radiation-induced biological damages. Biological impacts of atomic radiation exposure can be deterministic (in a period range a posteriori of the event and because of destructive tissue/organ harm) or stochastic (irregular, for example cell mutation related pathologies and heritable infections). Potential countermeasures according to a specific scenario require considering basic issues, e.g., the type of radiation, people directly affected and first responders, range of doses received and whether the exposure or contamination has affected the total body or is partial. This review focuses on available medical countermeasures (radioprotectors, radiomitigators, radionuclide scavengers), biodosimetry (biological and biophysical techniques that can be quantitatively correlated with the magnitude of the radiation dose received), and strategies to implement the response to an accidental radiation exposure. In the case of large-scale atomic or radiological events, the most ideal choice for triage, dose assessment and victim classification, is the utilization of global biodosimetry networks, in combination with the automation of strategies based on modular platforms.

[5] Mitochondrial disease in children
    S Rahman (2020)
    PMID:32176382 DOI:10.1111/joim.13054 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/joim.13054
    snippet: … defined clinically as a triad of PEO, pigmentary retinopathy and heart block presenting before the age of 20 years, with minor criteria including cerebellar ataxia and elevated CSF …
    abstract: Mitochondrial disease presenting in childhood is characterized by clinical, biochemical and genetic complexity. Some children are affected by canonical syndromes, but the majority have nonclassical multisystemic disease presentations involving virtually any organ in the body. Each child has a unique constellation of clinical features and disease trajectory, leading to enormous challenges in diagnosis and management of these heterogeneous disorders. This review discusses the classical mitochondrial syndromes presenting most frequently in childhood and then presents an organ-based perspective including systems less frequently linked to mitochondrial disease, such as skin and hair abnormalities and immune dysfunction. An approach to diagnosis is then presented, encompassing clinical evaluation and biochemical, neuroimaging and genetic investigations, and emphasizing the problem of phenocopies. The impact of next-generation sequencing is discussed, together with the importance of functional validation of novel genetic variants never previously linked to mitochondrial disease. The review concludes with a brief discussion of currently available and emerging therapies. The field of mitochondrial medicine has made enormous strides in the last 30 years, with approaching 400 different genes across two genomes now linked to primary mitochondrial disease. However, many important questions remain unanswered, including the reasons for tissue specificity and variability of clinical presentation of individuals sharing identical gene defects, and a lack of disease-modifying therapies and biomarkers to monitor disease progression and/or response to treatment.

[6] IMDs with GI manifestations.xlsx
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.iembase.org/gamuts/store/docs/IMDs_with_GI_manifestations.pdf
    snippet: Glycine (CSF), Glycine (CSF) / Glycine (P) ratio. 617301 IEM0187. Lipoic acid ... FDXR. AR. X. Complexes I - IV activity (muscle), DNA. 617717 IEM0203.

[7] 620423 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620423
    snippet: AR, 3, 617717 · FDXR · 103270 · 17q25.1 · Multiple mitochondrial ... Plasma glycine, CSF glycine, and a plasma/CSF glycine ratio were elevated at 1 year of age.

[8] FDXR Upregulation by p63/p73 is a Prognostic and ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.64898/2026.02.25.707207v1.full-text https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.02.25.707207v1.full-text
    snippet: Moreover, FDXR expression was induced by both treatments and FDXR ... CSF CXCL10, CXCL9, and Neopterin as Candidate Prognostic Biomarkers ...

[9] Mitochondrial Disorders
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/mitosyn.html
    snippet: Glycine: High in serum & CSF; Brain MRI: Deep gray matter lesions. Mitochondrial myopathy with lactic acidosis (MMLA) ○ Patatin-like phospholipase domain ...

[10] Mitochondrial biology and dysfunction in secondary mitochondrial disease
    MJ Baker, JJ Crameri, DR Thorburn, AE Frazier… (2022)
    PMC9727669 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9727669/
    snippet: … FDX2 and FDXR reduce sulfane to sulfide and finalize [2Fe-… ory chain deficiency with mitochondrial encephalopathy [59]. … of glycine, lactate and pyruvate within the blood, urine or …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases are a broad, genetically heterogeneous class of metabolic disorders characterized by deficits in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Primary mitochondrial disease (PMD) defines pathologies resulting from mutation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear genes affecting either mtDNA expression or the biogenesis and function of the respiratory chain. Secondary mitochondrial disease (SMD) arises due to mutation of nuclear-encoded genes independent of, or indirectly influencing OXPHOS assembly and operation. Despite instances of novel SMD increasing year-on-year, PMD is much more widely discussed in the literature. Indeed, since the implementation of next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques in 2010, many novel mitochondrial disease genes have been identified, approximately half of which are linked to SMD. This review will consolidate existing knowledge of SMDs and outline discrete categories within which to better understand the diversity of SMD phenotypes. By providing context to the biochemical and molecular pathways perturbed in SMD, we hope to further demonstrate the intricacies of SMD pathologies outside of their indirect contribution to mitochondrial energy generation.