SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder and are associated with impaired mRNA processing
    A Fliedner, P Kirchner, A Wiesener… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30228-7
    snippet: … function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, … variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated …
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[2] Rolle des Transkriptionsregulators PHF6 und des Transkriptionsterminators SCAF4 bei Entwicklungsstörungen
    A Fliedner
    https://open.fau.de/bitstreams/f40a0227-9d48-4595-93f1-bfef2148013e/download
    snippet: … trunkierende und zwei Spleiß… SCAF4 as a new NDD associated gene and provided new insights into the pathomechanisms of PHF6-associated Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome…

[3] Roles of Transcriptional Regulator PHF6 and Transcriptional Terminator SCAF4 in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    A Fliedner (2021)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/551ce428590f754704e579472ecaea1a/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2026366&diss=y
    snippet: … trunkierende und zwei Spleiß… SCAF4 as a new NDD associated gene and provided new insights into the pathomechanisms of PHF6-associated Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome…

[4] Understanding the Role of CLP1 in Messenger RNA Transcription and Neurodegeneration
    GR LaForce (2022)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/123fc43480de3543a4549b152711ac76/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
    snippet: … polyadenylation and disease-associated … of disease. Furthermore, we find THOC6 is involved in regulation of splicing and is essential for neurodevelopment in the mammalian brain. …

[5] Conference: Oral Presentations
    PLO Plenary (2020)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-020-00740-6
    snippet: … listed disease-gene associations continues to increase steadily. … disease gene discovery? Here, we highlight the discovery of Schaaf-Yang syndrome, a rare neurodevelopment disorder …

[6] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929720302287
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — Brain MRIs were performed in five individuals showing nonspecific ... disorder and that impaired SCAF4 function results in altered mRNA processing ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[7] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343296712_Variants_in_SCAF4_Cause_a_Neurodevelopmental_Disorder_and_Are_Associated_with_Impaired_mRNA_Processing
    snippet: ... SCAF4 phenotype, including specifically for the Arg475Ter variant, which has previously been reported in an individual with mild ID and a normal MRI brain.
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[8] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/pdf/S0002-9297(20)30228-7.pdf
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — Brain MRIs were performed in five individuals showing nonspecific ... MRI anom. subcort., periventr. hypomyelination. N/D. N/D (normal US) ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[9] (PDF) SCAF4‐related syndromic intellectual disability
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/365172286_SCAF4-related_syndromic_intellectual_disability
    snippet: ... MRI anomalies +n/a n/a n/a +++ 4/6 ... disorders, with impaired SCAF4 function leading to altered mRNA processing and splicing.

[10] Family's journey with Fliedner-Zweier syndrome diagnosis
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.facebook.com/groups/6162428427107436/posts/29002271442696477/
    snippet: A brain MRI showed us he did not have Cerebral Palsy. The next few ... SCAF4 gene, which plays a critical role in brain development.