SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Expert consensus on genetic diagnostic approaches for patients with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy
    V Straub, AR Clause, S Donkervoort, PB Kang… (2025)
    PMID:41151001 DOI:10.1212/WNL.0000000000214291 https://www.neurology.org/doi/abs/10.1212/WNL.0000000000214291
    snippet: … dystrophy dominant; LGMDR = limb-girdle muscular … of muscle pathology can be suggestive of a specific muscle … variant phasing, muscle MRI, muscle biopsy with immunohistochemical …
    abstract: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is the phenotypic description of a clinically and genetically diverse group of inherited neuromuscular disorders involving proximal muscles of the pelvic and shoulder girdles. There are currently over 30 different genetic forms of LGMD, and despite diagnostic advances, accurate diagnoses may be difficult to achieve. Although clinical diagnosis of a patient with a specific form of LGMD is possible in some cases, a precise and timely genetic diagnosis can be crucial to anticipate and prevent complications associated with particular genetic forms of LGMD (e.g., extramuscular manifestations such as cardiac, respiratory, or cognitive impairments). With the rapid pace of genetic testing advances, updates on training and education are imperative to support the correct use of these tests. We formed an expert consensus to provide an efficient diagnostic approach meant to empower clinicians in the use of genetic and other supportive tests. Informed selection and interpretation of a gene panel; use of genome or exome sequencing; and use of biochemical, imaging, pathology, and electromyography tests are discussed here. Ultimately, genetic testing should help to confirm a diagnosis and guide treatment decisions or counseling services.

[2] Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/musdist/lg.html
    snippet: ... (LGMDR). 1 (2A): Calpain-3; 15q15 2 (2B): Dysferlin; 2p13 3 (2D): α ... SNUPN; 15q24, Other Pompe (2V): GAA; 17q25. 2W: LIMS2; 2q14. 2Y: TOR1AIP1; 1q25
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>This article reviews the current classification system, common subtypes, differential diagnosis, diagnostic algorithms, current management strategies, and evolving therapeutic areas for limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs).<h4>Latest developments</h4>There are currently five dominantly inherited LGMDs (LGMD-D1 to D5) and 29 recessively inherited LGMDs (LGMD-R1 to R29). Progress in molecular genetics makes next-generation sequencing gene panels the initial step in diagnosing LGMD and, in some cases, obviates the need for muscle biopsy. The panel should include LGMD genes and genes responsible for other hereditary myopathies and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing can be performed before or after a muscle biopsy, depending on the specifics of each case. Once a diagnosis of LGMD is established, genetic counseling, symptomatic and supportive care, and cardiopulmonary surveillance remain the cornerstones of management. However, results from preclinical studies and early-stage clinical trials of genetic therapies for common LGMD-R subtypes are promising.<h4>Essential points</h4>Progressive proximal weakness and hyperCKemia are hallmark features of LGMDs; however, they are not specific and can also be observed in many acquired and hereditary myopathies. Muscle biopsy is typically reserved for patients with negative or inconclusive genetic testing and can be particularly useful for verifying the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance. Advances in molecular genetics and genetic therapies have revolutionized the diagnostic landscape of LGMDs and paved the way for future disease-specific treatments.

[3] Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Clinical Presentation
    (authors not shown)
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1170911-clinical
    snippet: ... LGMDR (previous name). LGMD D1 (1E, 1D): DNAJB6; 7q36. LGMD D2 (1F) ... SNUPN; 15q24. Table 3. Selected LGMD Subtypes. Subtype, Gene ...

[4] The Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies | Request PDF
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366446640_The_Limb-Girdle_Muscular_Dystrophies
    snippet: Classification into recessive (LGMDR) and dominant (LGMDD) forms reflects ... SNUPN gene. The clinical manifestations of this condition are ...

[5] Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Workup
    (authors not shown)
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1170911-workup
    snippet: ... LGMDR (previous name). LGMD D1 (1E, 1D): DNAJB6; 7q36. LGMD D2 (1F) ... SNUPN; 15q24. Table 3. Selected LGMD Subtypes. Subtype, Gene ...

[6] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a … and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are … dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[7] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and … of muscular dystrophy varying from a congenital to a childhood- onset limb girdle muscular dystrophy (…
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[8] SNUPN deficiency causes a recessive muscular dystrophy due to RNA mis-splicing and ECM dysregulation
    M Nashabat, N Nabavizadeh, HP Saraçoğlu… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-45933-5
    snippet: … resulted in the same phenotype31. Finally, we utilized the … clinical and histopathological muscular phenotypes, along with … , which can cause pathological changes that contribute to …
    abstract: SNURPORTIN-1, encoded by SNUPN, plays a central role in the nuclear import of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins. However, its physiological function remains unexplored. In this study, we investigate 18 children from 15 unrelated families who present with atypical muscular dystrophy and neurological defects. Nine hypomorphic SNUPN biallelic variants, predominantly clustered in the last coding exon, are ascertained to segregate with the disease. We demonstrate that mutant SPN1 failed to oligomerize leading to cytoplasmic aggregation in patients' primary fibroblasts and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated mutant cell lines. Additionally, mutant nuclei exhibit defective spliceosomal maturation and breakdown of Cajal bodies. Transcriptome analyses reveal splicing and mRNA expression dysregulation, particularly in sarcolemmal components, causing disruption of cytoskeletal organization in mutant cells and patient muscle tissues. Our findings establish SNUPN deficiency as the genetic etiology of a previously unrecognized subtype of muscular dystrophy and provide robust evidence of the role of SPN1 for muscle homeostasis.

[9] A Case of Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Type R29 Presenting with Myocardial Damage as the Initial Manifestation: A case report
    Q Dai, X Hu, B Li, Q Peng (2026)
    https://assets-eu.researchsquare.com/files/rs-8429398/v1/499608a9-2f52-4f74-b34e-24bd44066151.pdf
    snippet: … , SNUPN variants also demonstrate phenotypic heterogeneity… , the direct pathological link between the SNUPN variants and … tissue or muscle biopsy for con rmatory histopathological or …

[10] Histopathological and genetic features of patients with limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2C.
    G DİNİZ, F Hazan, H TOSUN YILDIRIM… (2014)
    PMID:24638197 DOI:10.5146/tjpath.2014.01239 https://openurl.ebsco.com/contentitem/gcd:95862226?sid=ebsco:plink:crawler-gcd&id=ebsco:gcd:95862226&crl=c&jrnl=10185615
    snippet: … findings with clinical phenotypes and to display the regional differences as for the clinical, … found on the muscle biopsy specimens, and clinically diagnosed as muscular dystrophy were …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>In this study, it was aimed to describe the clinical, histopathological and genetic features of 20 patients with gamma sarcoglycanopathy confirmed by muscle biopsies and genetic analysis.<h4>Material and method</h4>We retrospectively reviewed 20 patients from whom muscle biopsy specimens were obtained between 2007 and 2012. All patients were clinically diagnosed as muscular dystrophy and biopsy materials were collected from five different centers of neurological disorders. All DNAs were extracted from muscle tissues or blood samples of patients and genetic tests (mutation analyses for gamma sarcoglycan gene and deletion-duplication analyses for all 4 sarcoglycan genes) were performed.<h4>Results</h4>The mean age of the patients was 7.6 years (2 -21 years). Only one case (5%) was older than 14 years. The mean CPK level was 10311 U/L (1311 - 35000 U∕L). There were 4 siblings in these series. Expression defects of gamma sarcoglycan staining were determined in (15 males, and 5 females) all patients with muscle biopsy specimens. But only in 9 of them, disease-causing defects could be determined with genetic analyses.<h4>Conclusion</h4>The present study has demonstrated that both examination of muscle biopsy specimens and DNA analysis remain important methods in the differential diagnosis of muscular dystrophies. Because dystrophinopathies and sarcoglycanopathies have similar clinical manifestation.