SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Advancing the clinical and molecular understanding of cornelia de lange syndrome: A multidisciplinary pediatric case series and review of the literature
    K Gruca (2024)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: … MAU2 interacts with the cohesin ring in the closed state, and its … , limb reduction abnormalities and the classic phenotype suggest a high likelihood of Cornelia de Lange syndrome, …

[2] Cornelia de Lange spectrum
    Á Ascaso, M Arnedo, B Puisac… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2341287924001388
    snippet: … Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare congenital … of additional genes (BRD4, ANKRD11, MAU2), but the lack of … Facial features and limb abnormalities in patients with CdLS …
    abstract: The cohesin complex plays crucial roles in DNA repair, chromatid separation, and gene transcription regulation. Pathogenic variants in cohesins or dysfunctional transcriptional regulators lead to cohesinopathies, a broader group of disorders including Cornelia de Lange Spectrum (CdLSp), for which the prevalence of cancer cases remains unclear. Here, we aimed to assess the prevalence of oncological events in CdLSp and elucidate the role of cohesin variants in cancer predisposition. We developed a custom next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel targeting predisposition and pathogenic genes, which we applied on N = 120 samples of pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), identifying 11 out of 229 total-10 germline and 1 somatic-variants in cohesin genes. Data of N = 205 brain tumors were extracted by bioinformatic analysis of data from open-source databases carrying 19 somatic variants. In a cohort of 54 CdLSp patients, the largest cohort from a single center, with a median age of 13 years, the hypothesis of an increased prevalence of cancer in CdLSp was not confirmed. Our findings highlight a significant involvement of germline NIPBL variants in CdLSp, whereas RAD21 and STAG1/2 are predominantly found as somatic variants in neoplasms. However, a distinct genetic or molecular pattern distinguishing variants leading to CdLSp from tumors was not identified. Hence, we advocate for further investigation into the relationship between cohesin variants and cancer predisposition in a larger cohort of patients, with a longer observation time and including different types of malignancies, with more focus on epigenetic approaches.

[3] Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    MA Deardorff, SE Noon, ID Krantz (2020)
    https://europepmc.org/books/nbk1104/
    snippet: … life), hypertrichosis, and upper-limb reduction defects that range from … phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb … The regulatory proteins NIPBL and MAU2 play key roles in …
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[4] Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction
    D Braunholz, M Hullings, MC Gil (2012)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/ejhg2011175
    snippet: … interaction domains of NIPBL and MAU2, and tested the role … –MAU2 binding in the determination of human phenotype. … For example, none of the patients in this report have severe …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; or Brachmann-de Lange syndrome) is a dominantly inherited congenital malformation disorder with features that include characteristic facies, cognitive delays, growth retardation and limb anomalies. Mutations in nearly 60% of CdLS patients have been identified in NIPBL, which encodes a regulator of the sister chromatid cohesion complex. NIPBL, also known as delangin, is a homolog of yeast and amphibian Scc2 and C. elegans PQN-85. Although the exact mechanism of NIPBL function in sister chromatid cohesion is unclear, in vivo yeast and C. elegans experiments and in vitro vertebrate cell experiments have demonstrated that NIPBL/Scc2 functionally interacts with the MAU2/Scc4 protein to initiate loading of cohesin onto chromatin. To test the significance of this model in the clinical setting of CdLS, we fine-mapped the NIBPL-MAU2 interaction domain and tested the functional significance of missense mutations and variants in NIPBL and MAU2 identified in these minimal domains in a cohort of patients with CdLS. We demonstrate that specific novel mutations at the N-terminus of the MAU2-interacting domain of NIBPL result in markedly reduced MAU2 binding, although we appreciate no consistent clinical difference in the small group of patients with these mutations. These data suggest that factors in addition to MAU2 are essential in determining the clinical features and severity of CdLS.

[5] Cornelia de Lange syndrome: from a disease to a broader spectrum
    A Selicorni, M Mariani, A Lettieri, V Massa (2021)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/7/1075
    snippet: … , hirsutism, small hands and feet or limb malformations. The incidence of the syndrome has … phenotype and typical CdLS facial dysmorphism carrying a pathogenic variant in MAU2, …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetic disease that exemplifies the evolution of knowledge in the field of rare genetic disorders. Originally described as a unique pattern of major and minor anomalies, over time this syndrome has been shown to be characterized by a significant variability of clinical expression. By increasing the number of patients described, knowledge of the natural history of the condition has been enriched with the demonstration of the relative frequency of various potential comorbidities. Since 2006, the discovery of CdLS's molecular basis has shown an equally vast genetic heterogeneity linked to the presence of variants in genes encoding for the cohesin complex pathway. The most recent clinical-genetic data led to the classification of the "original syndrome" into a "clinical spectrum" that foresees the presence of classic patients, of non-classic forms, and of conditions that show a modest phenotypic overlapping with the original disease. Finally, the knowledge of the molecular basis of the disease has allowed the development of basic research projects that could lay the foundations for the development of possible innovative pharmacological treatments.

[6] 620568 - CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 6; CDLS6
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620568
    snippet: AD, 3, 621570 · MAU2 · 614560 · Xp11.22 · Cornelia de Lange syndrome 2 ... phenotype because none had growth failure, hypertrichosis, or radial and limb anomalies ...

[7] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    …, L de Polli Cellin, AR Clause, AA de Lima Jorge… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: … episignature consisting of seven MAU2 samples and defined by 203 … anomalies, recapitulating key clinical features of MAU2-… clinical features. To explore the molecular consequences of …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[8] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1104/
    snippet: by MA Deardorff · 2020 · Cited by 188 — Upper limb anomalies. Severe abnormalities of the upper extremities are seen in 25% of individuals with CdLS. Upper extremity deficiencies ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[9] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8223&context=papers
    snippet: The syndrome is characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, along with developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[10] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome (CDL)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/cornelia_de_lange_syndrome
    snippet: CdLS includes prenatal-onset growth restriction, hypertrichosis, and upper-limb reduction defects ranging from subtle phalangeal abnormalities to oligodactyly,