SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.…
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[2] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … dystrophy varying from a congenital to a childhood- onset limb girdle muscular dystrophy (… vasti and gastrocnemius were detected on T2 weighted STIR sequences. (D) Brain MRI of the …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[3] Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies
    SDMDPD Limb
    https://www.medlink.com/articles/limb-girdle-muscular-dystrophies
    snippet: … Pseudohypertrophy of calf muscles has been reported in some cases of autosomal … soleus and the gastrocnemius. The MRI findings are similar in Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy, …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>This article reviews the current classification system, common subtypes, differential diagnosis, diagnostic algorithms, current management strategies, and evolving therapeutic areas for limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs).<h4>Latest developments</h4>There are currently five dominantly inherited LGMDs (LGMD-D1 to D5) and 29 recessively inherited LGMDs (LGMD-R1 to R29). Progress in molecular genetics makes next-generation sequencing gene panels the initial step in diagnosing LGMD and, in some cases, obviates the need for muscle biopsy. The panel should include LGMD genes and genes responsible for other hereditary myopathies and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing can be performed before or after a muscle biopsy, depending on the specifics of each case. Once a diagnosis of LGMD is established, genetic counseling, symptomatic and supportive care, and cardiopulmonary surveillance remain the cornerstones of management. However, results from preclinical studies and early-stage clinical trials of genetic therapies for common LGMD-R subtypes are promising.<h4>Essential points</h4>Progressive proximal weakness and hyperCKemia are hallmark features of LGMDs; however, they are not specific and can also be observed in many acquired and hereditary myopathies. Muscle biopsy is typically reserved for patients with negative or inconclusive genetic testing and can be particularly useful for verifying the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance. Advances in molecular genetics and genetic therapies have revolutionized the diagnostic landscape of LGMDs and paved the way for future disease-specific treatments.

[4] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38366623/
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[5] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features ... Patients with SNUPN variants show a common pattern in MRI.
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[6] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://deustoteka.deusto.es/items/eb9641d8-d6fb-49e7-8653-a06cd7249491/full
    snippet: We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI ... Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[7] Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Clinical Presentation
    (authors not shown)
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1170911-clinical
    snippet: On MRI, most affected muscles include hamstrings followed by paraspinal and gluteal muscles. ... SNUPN; 15q24. Table 3. Selected LGMD ...

[8] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://usebiotransfer.org/tools/geo-finder/GSE253519/
    snippet: Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene.
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[9] Muscle MRI patterns for limb girdle muscle dystrophies: systematic review
    I Alawneh, A Stosic, H Gonorazky (2023)
    PMID:37129643 DOI:10.1007/s00415-023-11722-1 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00415-023-11722-1
    snippet: … Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of … muscles even from the beginning of the disease and spared … due to data paucity and phenotype heterogeneity. Our findings …
    abstract: Limb girdle muscle dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of inherited neuromuscular disorders comprising more than 20 genes. There have been increasing efforts to characterize this group with Muscle MRI. However, due to the complexity and similarities, the interpretation of the MRI patterns is usually done by experts in the field. Here, we proposed a step-by-step image interpretation of Muscle MRI in LGDM by evaluating the variability of muscle pattern involvement reported in the literature. A systematic review with an open start date to November 2022 was conducted to describe all LGMDs' muscle MRI patterns. Eighty-eight studies were included in the final review. Data were found to describe muscle MRI patterns for 15 out of 17 LGMDs types. Although the diagnosis of LGMDs is challenging despite the advanced genetic testing and other diagnostic modalities, muscle MRI is shown to help in the diagnosis of LGMDs. To further increase the yield for muscle MRI in the neuromuscular field, larger cohorts of patients need to be conducted.

[10] European muscle MRI study in limb girdle muscular dystrophy type R1/2A (LGMDR1/LGMD2A)
    A Barp, P Laforet, L Bello, G Tasca, J Vissing… (2020)
    PMID:31555977 DOI:10.1007/s00415-019-09539-y https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00415-019-09539-y
    snippet: … The effect of null mutation load on age at symptom onset was tested by Cox regression. … scan (T1w sequence) of one LGMDR1 patient in his fifties with a moderate phenotype. a …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type R1/2A (LGMDR1/LGMD2A) is a progressive myopathy caused by deficiency of calpain 3, a calcium-dependent cysteine protease of skeletal muscle, and it represents the most frequent type of LGMD worldwide. In the last few years, muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been proposed as a tool for identifying patterns of muscular involvement in genetic disorders and as a biomarker of disease progression in muscle diseases. In this study, 57 molecularly confirmed LGMDR1 patients from a European cohort (age range 7-78 years) underwent muscle MRI and a global evaluation of functional status (Gardner-Medwin and Walton score and ability to raise the arms).<h4>Results</h4>We confirmed a specific pattern of fatty substitution involving predominantly the hip adductors and hamstrings in lower limbs. Spine extensors were more severely affected than spine rotators, in agreement with higher incidence of lordosis than scoliosis in LGMDR1. Hierarchical clustering of lower limb MRI scores showed that involvement of anterior thigh muscles discriminates between classes of disease progression. Severity of muscle fatty substitution was significantly correlated with CAPN3 mutations: in particular, patients with no or one "null" alleles showed a milder involvement, compared to patients with two null alleles (i.e., predicting absence of calpain-3 protein). Expectedly, fat infiltration scores strongly correlated with functional measures. The "pseudocollagen" sign (central areas of sparing in some muscle) was associated with longer and more severe disease course.<h4>Conclusions</h4>We conclude that skeletal muscle MRI represents a useful tool in the diagnostic workup and clinical management of LGMDR1.