SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Hypothesis: determining phenotypic specificity facilitates understanding of pathophysiology in rare genetic disorders
    HA Haijes, J Jaeken, PM van Hasselt (2020)
    PMID:31804708 DOI:10.1002/jimd.12201 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jimd.12201
    snippet: … The vocabulary of the Human Phenotype Ontology was used to annotate all phenotypic … genes, according to the Human Phenotype Ontology. Prioritisation based on phenotypic …
    abstract: In the rapidly growing group of rare genetic disorders, data scarcity demands an intelligible use of available data, in order to improve understanding of underlying pathophysiology. We hypothesize, based on the principle that clinical similarities may be indicative of shared pathophysiology, that determining phenotypic specificity could provide unsuspected insights in pathophysiology of rare genetic disorders. We explored our hypothesis by studying subunit deficiencies of the conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, a subgroup of congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG). In this systematic data assessment, all 45 reported patients with COG-CDG were included. The vocabulary of the Human Phenotype Ontology was used to annotate all phenotypic features and to assess occurrence in other genetic disorders. Gene occurrence ratios were calculated by dividing the frequency in the patient cohort over the number of associated genes, according to the Human Phenotype Ontology. Prioritisation based on phenotypic specificity was highly informative and captured phenotypic features commonly associated with glycosylation disorders. Moreover, it captured features not seen in any other glycosylation disorder, among which episodic fever, likely reflecting underappreciated other cellular functions of the COG complex. Interestingly, the COG complex was recently implicated in the autophagy pathway, as are more than half of the genes underlying disorders that present with episodic fever. This suggests that whereas many phenotypic features in these patients are caused by disrupted glycosylation, episodic fever might be caused by disrupted autophagy. Thus, we here demonstrate support for our hypothesis that determining phenotypic specificity could facilitate understanding of pathophysiology in rare genetic disorders.

[2] Meta-Analysis of Clinical Phenotype and Patient Survival in Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Microcephaly, Arthrogryposis, and Structural Brain Anomalies Due to …
    D Marchiori (2022)
    DOI:10.1101/2022.10.08.22280875.abstract https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.08.22280875.abstract
    snippet: … A mapping table of phenotype terms from The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) with clusters defined in this analysis. Not all clinical features defined in the analysis are present in the …

[3] HPO2GO: prediction of human phenotype ontology term associations for proteins using cross ontology annotation co-occurrences
    T Doğan (2018)
    PMID:26119816 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.05.020 https://peerj.com/articles/5298.pdf
    snippet: … human phenotype ontology: semantic unification of common and rare disease. The American Journal of Human Genetics 97(1):111–124 DOI 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.05.020. Guala D, …
    abstract: The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) is widely used in the rare disease community for differential diagnostics, phenotype-driven analysis of next-generation sequence-variation data, and translational research, but a comparable resource has not been available for common disease. Here, we have developed a concept-recognition procedure that analyzes the frequencies of HPO disease annotations as identified in over five million PubMed abstracts by employing an iterative procedure to optimize precision and recall of the identified terms. We derived disease models for 3,145 common human diseases comprising a total of 132,006 HPO annotations. The HPO now comprises over 250,000 phenotypic annotations for over 10,000 rare and common diseases and can be used for examining the phenotypic overlap among common diseases that share risk alleles, as well as between Mendelian diseases and common diseases linked by genomic location. The annotations, as well as the HPO itself, are freely available.

[4] Whole-exome sequencing in un centro neurologico pediatrico di terzo livello: uno studio pilota.
    E Calì (2020)
    http://unire.unige.it/handle/123456789/2875
    snippet: … This approach has gained increasing attention thanks to Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO), a widely used … disorder with progressive microcephaly, spasticity and brain abnormality.…

[5] HPO2GO: prediction of human phenotype ontology term associations using cross ontology annotation co-occurrences
    T Doğan (2018)
    DOI:10.7287/peerj.preprints.26663v2 https://peerj.com/preprints/26663.pdf
    snippet: … Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) system annotates disease 44 records (ie, terms and definitions about diseases, recorded in relevant databases) with a 45 standardized phenotypic …
    abstract: Analysing the relationships between biomolecules and the genetic diseases is a highly active area of research, where the aim is to identify the genes and their products that cause a particular disease due to functional changes originated from mutations. Biological ontologies are frequently employed in these studies, which provides researchers with extensive opportunities for knowledge discovery through computational data analysis. In this study, a novel approach is proposed for the identification of relationships between biomedical entities by automatically mapping phenotypic abnormality defining HPO terms with biomolecular function defining GO terms, where each association indicates the occurrence of the abnormality due to the loss of the biomolecular function expressed by the corresponding GO term. The proposed HPO2GO mappings were extracted by calculating the frequency of the co-annotations of the terms on the same genes/proteins, using already existing curated HPO and GO annotation sets. This was followed by the filtering of the unreliable mappings that could be observed due to chance, by statistical resampling of the co-occurrence similarity distributions. Furthermore, the biological relevance of the finalized mappings were discussed over selected cases, using the literature. The resulting HPO2GO mappings can be employed in different settings to predict and to analyse novel gene/protein - ontology term - disease relations. As an application of the proposed approach, HPO term – protein associations (i.e., HPO2protein) were predicted. In order to test the predictive performance of the method on a quantitative basis, and to compare it with the state-of-the-art, CAFA2 challenge HPO prediction target protein set was employed. The results of the benchmark indicated the potential of the proposed approach, as HPO2GO performance was among the best (Fmax = 0.35). The automated cross ontology mapping approach developed in this work may be extended to other ontologies as well, to identify unexplored relation patterns at the systemic level. The datasets, results and the source code of HPO2GO are available for download at:  https://github.com/cansyl/HPO2GO .

[6] Human Phenotype Ontology
    (authors not shown)
    https://mseqdr.com/hpo_browser.php?253
    snippet: Progressive microcephaly. Synonym: Microcephaly, postnatal, progressive ... Human Phenotype Ontology(HPO) is developed by the Human Phenotype Ontology Consortium.

[7] HPO2GO: prediction of human phenotype ontology term ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.7287/peerj.preprints.26663v2 PMC6076985 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6076985/
    snippet: by T Doğan · 2018 · Cited by 44 — ... progressive microcephaly from child birth (Barth, 1993). The ... Prediction of Human Phenotype Ontology terms by means of hierarchical ensemble methods.
    abstract: Analysing the relationships between biomolecules and the genetic diseases is a highly active area of research, where the aim is to identify the genes and their products that cause a particular disease due to functional changes originated from mutations. Biological ontologies are frequently employed in these studies, which provides researchers with extensive opportunities for knowledge discovery through computational data analysis. In this study, a novel approach is proposed for the identification of relationships between biomedical entities by automatically mapping phenotypic abnormality defining HPO terms with biomolecular function defining GO terms, where each association indicates the occurrence of the abnormality due to the loss of the biomolecular function expressed by the corresponding GO term. The proposed HPO2GO mappings were extracted by calculating the frequency of the co-annotations of the terms on the same genes/proteins, using already existing curated HPO and GO annotation sets. This was followed by the filtering of the unreliable mappings that could be observed due to chance, by statistical resampling of the co-occurrence similarity distributions. Furthermore, the biological relevance of the finalized mappings were discussed over selected cases, using the literature. The resulting HPO2GO mappings can be employed in different settings to predict and to analyse novel gene/protein - ontology term - disease relations. As an application of the proposed approach, HPO term – protein associations (i.e., HPO2protein) were predicted. In order to test the predictive performance of the method on a quantitative basis, and to compare it with the state-of-the-art, CAFA2 challenge HPO prediction target protein set was employed. The results of the benchmark indicated the potential of the proposed approach, as HPO2GO performance was among the best (Fmax = 0.35). The automated cross ontology mapping approach developed in this work may be extended to other ontologies as well, to identify unexplored relation patterns at the systemic level. The datasets, results and the source code of HPO2GO are available for download at:  https://github.com/cansyl/HPO2GO .

[8] Progressive microcephaly — Sign or Symptom
    (authors not shown)
    https://eleplan.com/rare-diseases/signs/progressive-microcephaly
    snippet: Progressive microcephaly — Progressively abnormally small cranium. Seen in 30 rare diseases ... This page uses the Human Phenotype Ontology (2026-06-23) — Human ...

[9] An ontology plot of HPO terms characterized in the ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/An-ontology-plot-of-HPO-terms-characterized-in-the-recruited-pedigrees-with_fig2_359171723
    snippet: Background Deep phenotyping is important for rare disease diagnostics, often using the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO). ... progressive microcephaly, epilepsy, ...

[10] Heterozygous lamin B1 and lamin B2 variants cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:33033404 DOI:10.1038/s41436-020-00980-3 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41436-020-00980-3
    snippet: by DA Parry · 2021 · Cited by 61 — For 100kGP, variants and Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms were ... progressive microcephaly/encephalopathy. As well, nuclear ...
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Lamins are the major component of nuclear lamina, maintaining structural integrity of the nucleus. Lamin A/C variants are well established to cause a spectrum of disorders ranging from myopathies to progeria, termed laminopathies. Phenotypes resulting from variants in LMNB1 and LMNB2 have been much less clearly defined.<h4>Methods</h4>We investigated exome and genome sequencing from the Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study and the 100,000 Genomes Project to identify novel microcephaly genes.<h4>Results</h4>Starting from a cohort of patients with extreme microcephaly, 13 individuals with heterozygous variants in the two human B-type lamins were identified. Recurrent variants were established to be de novo in nine cases and shown to affect highly conserved residues within the lamin ɑ-helical rod domain, likely disrupting interactions required for higher-order assembly of lamin filaments.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We identify dominant pathogenic variants in LMNB1 and LMNB2 as a genetic cause of primary microcephaly, implicating a major structural component of the nuclear envelope in its etiology and defining a new form of laminopathy. The distinct nature of this lamin B-associated phenotype highlights the strikingly different developmental requirements for lamin paralogs and suggests a novel mechanism for primary microcephaly warranting future investigation.