SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] De novo putative loss‐of‐function variants in TAF4 are associated with a neuro‐developmental disorder
    BDE Janssen, MJH van den Boogaard… (2022)
    DOI:10.1002/humu.24444 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/humu.24444
    snippet: … ) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro‐developmental disorder (… presents with an autosomal dominant inheritance; this is in keeping with its much lower …
    abstract: TATA-binding protein associated factor 4 (TAF4) is a subunit of the Transcription Factor IID (TFIID) complex, a central player in transcription initiation. Other members of this multimeric complex have been implicated previously as monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. TAF4 has not been described to date as a monogenic disease gene. We here present a cohort of eight individuals, each carrying de novo putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro-developmental disorder (NDD). Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin this novel disorder "TAF4-related NDD" (T4NDD). We place T4NDD in the context of other disorders related to TFIID subunits, revealing shared features of T4NDD with other TAF-opathies.

[2] Genome sequencing reveals high diagnostic yield in children with severe sporadic developmental language disorder
    MGP Kennis, L van Haaften, K van Hulst… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02214-7
    snippet: … seven autosomal dominant disorders, one autosomal … history for DLD and global developmental delays. The following exclusion … , fit within the phenotype of TAF4-related …
    abstract: A developmental language disorder (DLD) is a neurobiological condition characterized by impaired language development despite adequate linguistic input and normal intelligence. The role of monogenic causes in the pathogenesis of DLD is largely unknown and diagnostic genetic testing is rarely offered. This study assessed the diagnostic yield of genome sequencing in severe DLD and investigated the underlying genetic foundations. We designed a prospective cohort study involving trio-based genome sequencing in 25 individuals (aged 3-25 years) with severe DLD, no intellectual disability (non-verbal IQ ≥ 70), no autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and no first-degree family history of DLD or neurodevelopmental disorders. (Likely) pathogenic variants were found in nine of 25 individuals, reflecting a molecular diagnostic yield of 36%. The genetic causes were diverse and involved seven autosomal dominant disorders, one autosomal recessive disorder, and one sex chromosome aneuploidy. In seven individuals, the disease-causing variant occurred de novo. All identified (likely) pathogenic variants were located in genes or loci that have been previously implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders with variable clinical presentations. Importantly, the genetic diagnosis provided actionable insights for counselling and clinical follow-up for all nine individuals. This study reveals a high prevalence of rare (mainly de novo) genetic variants in individuals with severe and sporadic DLD, and demonstrates extensive molecular overlap with other neurodevelopmental disorders. Our results support the implementation of routine trio-based genetic testing in individuals with severe and sporadic DLD.

[3] O-GlcNAc transferase congenital disorder of glycosylation (OGT-CDG): Potential mechanistic targets revealed by evaluating the OGT interactome
    JM Mayfield, NL Hitefield, I Czajewski, L Vanhye… (2024)
    PMID:39059494 DOI:10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107599 https://www.jbc.org/article/S0021-9258(24)02100-8/fulltext
    snippet: … In this review, we will discuss the heterogenous phenotypic … OGT shares 73% homology in its amino acid sequence with … The OGT interactor TAF4 (60) has recently been associated …
    abstract: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is the sole enzyme responsible for the post-translational modification of O-GlcNAc on thousands of target nucleocytoplasmic proteins. To date, nine variants of OGT that segregate with OGT Congenital Disorder of Glycosylation (OGT-CDG) have been reported and characterized. Numerous additional variants have been associated with OGT-CDG, some of which are currently undergoing investigation. This disorder primarily presents with global developmental delay and intellectual disability (ID), alongside other variable neurological features and subtle facial dysmorphisms in patients. Several hypotheses aim to explain the etiology of OGT-CDG, with a prominent hypothesis attributing the pathophysiology of OGT-CDG to mutations segregating with this disorder disrupting the OGT interactome. The OGT interactome consists of thousands of proteins, including substrates as well as interactors that require noncatalytic functions of OGT. A key aim in the field is to identify which interactors and substrates contribute to the primarily neural-specific phenotype of OGT-CDG. In this review, we will discuss the heterogenous phenotypic features of OGT-CDG seen clinically, the variable biochemical effects of mutations associated with OGT-CDG, and the use of animal models to understand this disorder. Furthermore, we will discuss how previously identified OGT interactors causal for ID provide mechanistic targets for investigation that could explain the dysregulated gene expression seen in OGT-CDG models. Identifying shared or unique altered pathways impacted in OGT-CDG patients will provide a better understanding of the disorder as well as potential therapeutic targets.

[4] Molecular and cellular function of transcription factor 4 in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
    HY Chen, JF Bohlen, BJ Maher (2021)
    PMID:34134113 DOI:10.1159/000516666 https://karger.com/dne/article/43/3-4/159/819901
    snippet: … Autosomal dominant mutations in TCF4 are causal for a rare … by intellectual disability, developmental delay, breathing … Ultimately, these developmental phenotypes lead to behavioral …
    abstract: Transcription factor 4 (TCF4, also known as ITF2 or E2-2) is a type I basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor. Autosomal dominant mutations in TCF4 cause Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), a rare syndromic form of autism spectrum disorder. In this review, we provide an update on the progress regarding our understanding of TCF4 function at the molecular, cellular, physiological, and behavioral levels with a focus on phenotypes and therapeutic interventions. We examine upstream and downstream regulatory networks associated with TCF4 and discuss a range of in vitro and in vivo data with the aim of understanding emerging TCF4-specific mechanisms relevant for disease pathophysiology. In conclusion, we provide comments about exciting future avenues of research that may provide insights into potential new therapeutic targets for PTHS.

[5] Transcription factor 4 and its association with psychiatric disorders
    JR Teixeira, RA Szeto, VMA Carvalho… (2021)
    PMID:33414364 DOI:10.1038/s41398-020-01138-0 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41398-020-01138-0
    snippet: … 1) and has been shown to directly interact with the TAF4 subunit of general transcription … 71–73. One hypothesis to explain these observations is that the mild phenotype observed in …
    abstract: The human transcription factor 4 gene (TCF4) encodes a helix-loop-helix transcription factor widely expressed throughout the body and during neural development. Mutations in TCF4 cause a devastating autism spectrum disorder known as Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, characterized by a range of aberrant phenotypes including severe intellectual disability, absence of speech, delayed cognitive and motor development, and dysmorphic features. Moreover, polymorphisms in TCF4 have been associated with schizophrenia and other psychiatric and neurological conditions. Details about how TCF4 genetic variants are linked to these diseases and the role of TCF4 during neural development are only now beginning to emerge. Here, we provide a comprehensive review of the functions of TCF4 and its protein products at both the cellular and organismic levels, as well as a description of pathophysiological mechanisms associated with this gene.

[6] 620450 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620450
    snippet: Autosomal dominant intellectual developmental disorder-73 (MRD73) is a highly variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired intellectual ...

[7] Intellectual Developmental Disorder, Autosomal Dominant 73
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/intellectual_developmental_disorder_autosomal_dominant_73
    snippet: An autosomal dominant disorder characterized by intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe, developmental delay, speech delay, behavioral abnormalities ...

[8] Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal dominant 73
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.uniprot.org/diseases/DI-06716
    snippet: An autosomal dominant disorder characterized by intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe, developmental delay, speech delay, behavioral ...

[9] Gene: TAF4 (Intellectual disability)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/285/gene/TAF4/
    snippet: TAF4 were changed from intellectual disability, autosomal dominant 73, TAF4 were changed from Developmental delay to Developmental disorder

[10] De novo putative loss‐of‐function variants in TAF4 are ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10087332 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10087332/
    snippet: by BDE Janssen · 2022 · Cited by 11 — Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, Delayed ...
    abstract: TATA-binding protein associated factor 4 (TAF4) is a subunit of the Transcription Factor IID (TFIID) complex, a central player in transcription initiation. Other members of this multimeric complex have been implicated previously as monogenic disease genes in human developmental disorders. TAF4 has not been described to date as a monogenic disease gene. We here present a cohort of eight individuals, each carrying de novo putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants in TAF4 and expressing phenotypes consistent with a neuro-developmental disorder (NDD). Common features include intellectual disability, abnormal behavior, and facial dysmorphisms. We propose TAF4 as a novel dominant disease gene for NDD, and coin this novel disorder "TAF4-related NDD" (T4NDD). We place T4NDD in the context of other disorders related to TFIID subunits, revealing shared features of T4NDD with other TAF-opathies.