SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy… indicated that the DHX9 G414R and DHX9 R1052Q were functionally …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[2] Matrin3 is a Critical Splice Factor for Cardiac and Lymphvascular Development
    S Kreher (2022)
    https://jlupub.ub.uni-giessen.de/bitstreams/9c5710d4-6a86-47fe-baf6-9858919e1b63/download
    snippet: … dilated cardiomyopathy [103]–[105] and left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy [32]… processing, such as the DNA and RNA helicase DHX9 [117]. MATR3 also interacts with …

[3] Impaired binding of ZASP/Cypher with phosphoglucomutase 1 is associated with dilated cardiomyopathy
    T Arimura, N Inagaki, T Hayashi, D Shichi… (2009)
    https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/83/1/80/313137
    snippet: Aims Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ-motif protein (ZASP)/Cypher is a Z-disc component of which several dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)-associated mutations have been reported. …
    abstract: <h4>Aims</h4>Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ-motif protein (ZASP)/Cypher is a Z-disc component of which several dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)-associated mutations have been reported. Most of the mutations were found in exons 4 and 10 of ZASP/Cypher gene LDB3 and both exons were expressed preferentially in the heart. The aim of this study was to investigate the functional alteration of ZASP/Cypher caused by the DCM-associated mutations.<h4>Methods and results</h4>The yeast-two-hybrid method was used to identify the protein bound to a domain encoded by exon 4 of LDB3. Interaction of ZASP/Cypher with the binding protein was investigated in relation to the functional alterations caused by LDB3 mutations. Localization of the ZASP/Cypher-binding protein was examined at the cellular level in rat cardiomyocytes. Phosphoglucomutase 1 (PGM1), a metabolic enzyme involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, was identified as a protein interacting with ZASP/Cypher. PGM1 bound to ZASP/Cypher at the domains encoded by exons 4 and 10. Two LDB3 mutations in exon 4 (Ser189Leu and Thr206Ile) and another mutation in exon 10 (Ile345Met) reduced the binding to PGM1. PGM1 showed diffuse localization in the cytoplasm of rat cardiomyocytes under standard culture conditions, and distribution at the Z-discs was observed under stressed culture conditions. Binding of endogenous PGM1 and ZASP/Cypher was found to be enhanced by stress in rat cardiomyocytes.<h4>Conclusion</h4>ZASP/Cypher anchors PGM1 to Z-disc under conditions of stress. The impaired binding of PGM1 to ZASP/Cypher might be involved in the pathogenesis of DCM.

[4] SEEMA LALANI
    S LALANI
    https://profiles.viictr.org/display/269910
    snippet: … Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2023 08 …

[5] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — (Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[6] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37369308/
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — (Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[7] Gene: DHX9 -
    (authors not shown)
    https://gene.sfari.org/database/human-gene/DHX9
    snippet: Yamada et al., 2023 demonstrated that two de novo missense variants in the DHX9 gene (a p. ... ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy ... DHX9 missense ...

[8] AutDB - Autism Database - Search
    (authors not shown)
    http://autism.mindspec.org/GeneDetail/DHX9?species=Mus+musculus
    snippet: ... ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy ... DHX9 missense variant with a CADD score of 31 was ... DHX9 variants disrupted cellular localization and ...

[9] DHX34 - Drugs, Indications, Patents
    (authors not shown)
    https://synapse.patsnap.com/target/5af9fa5cbf6537dcbb56417bcf4026bc
    snippet: (Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the ...
    abstract: Although cadmium (Cd) exposure has been implicated in lung cancer development, systematic investigations into its association with cancer mortality, particularly lung cancer mortality remain limited, and the molecular mechanisms driving Cd-induced tumor progression are not fully understood. In this study, we first conducted a meta-analysis of existing cohort studies to quantitatively assess the association between Cd exposure and cancer- and lung cancer-specific mortality. We then employed an integrative approach combining bioinformatics analyses, LASSO regression, and Mendelian randomization to identify and validate DHX34 as a key gene implicated in Cd-related lung carcinogenesis. These findings were further supported by molecular docking, molecular dynamics simulations, in vitro functional assays, and in vivo tumor models. Our meta-analysis showed that long-term Cd exposure significantly increased cancer mortality risk, especially in males (RR = 1.49, 95 % CI: 1.13-1.96) and in lung cancer (RR = 1.86, 95 % CI: 1.36-2.54). Integration of GSE165549 and TCGA data identified 36 Cd-related genes enriched in tumor associated pathways including cell cycle and DNA replication. LASSO regression and Mendelian randomization suggested a causal role of DHX34 in lung cancer. Molecular docking demonstrated a strong binding affinity between Cd<sup>2 +</sup> and DHX34 (binding free energy = -5.34 kcal/mol), and molecular dynamics simulations confirmed the stability of this complex. Functional assays further showed that CdCl<sub>2</sub> exposure upregulated DHX34, thereby promoting lung cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth both in vitro and in vivo. Together, these findings provide multi-level evidence that DHX34 mediates Cd-induced lung cancer progression, highlighting the carcinogenic potential of environmental heavy metal exposure and offering new insights into molecular targets for early prevention, risk stratification, and therapeutic intervention.

[10] Left ventricular noncompaction: a disorder with genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity—a narrative review
    K Hirono, F Ichida (2022)
    PMID:36033229 DOI:10.21037/cdt-22-198 PMC9412206 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9412206/
    snippet: … septal defects, ventricular septal defects, and Epstein’s disease … clear basis for classifying phenotypic variations of LVNC. This … heart disease: cardiac arrhythmias and atrial septal defect …
    abstract: <h4>Background and objective</h4>Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is a cardiomyopathy characterized by excessive trabecular formation and deep recesses in the ventricular wall, with a bilaminar structure consisting of an endocardial noncompaction layer and an epicardial compacted layer. Although genetic variants have been reported in patients with LVNC, understanding of LVNC and its pathogenesis has not yet been fully elucidated. We addressed the latest findings on genes reported to be associated with LVNC morphogenesis and possible pathologies to understand the diverse spectrum between genotype and phenotype in LVNC. Also, the latest findings and issues related to the diagnosis of LVNC were summarized.<h4>Methods</h4>This article is written as a commentary narrative review and will provide an update on the current literature and available data on common forms of LVNC published in the past 30 years in English through to May 2022 using PubMed.<h4>Key content and findings</h4>Familial forms of LVNC are frequent, and autosomal dominant mode of inheritance has been predominantly observed. Several of the candidate causative genes are also mutated in other cardiomyopathies, suggesting a possible shared molecular and/or cellular etiology. The most common gene functions were sarcomere function whereas genes in mice LVNC models were involved in heart development. Echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) are useful for diagnosis although there are no unified criteria due to overdiagnosis of imaging, poor consistency between techniques, and lack of association between trabecular severity and adverse clinical outcomes.<h4>Conclusions</h4>This review reflects the current lack of clarity regarding the pathogenesis and significance of LVNC and showed the complexity of imaging diagnostic criteria, interpretation of the role of LVNC as a cause, and uncertainty regarding the specific genetic basis of LVNC.