SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … rise to a congenital disorder with multiple joint contractures in our patient cohort. In summary, … variants in the FILIP1 gene cause a novel autosomal recessive arthrogryposis phenotype …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[2] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … arthrogryposis as the recruited condition, and 229 individuals with congenital contractures … identified three individuals from two families with FILIP1 alterations, suggesting that this is a …

[3] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … with homozygous FILIP1 exon 3-6 deletion (NM_015687.5), multiple joint contractures, … Our work provides evidence to support the existence of FILIP1-related arthrogryposis with …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[4] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a diverse group of conditions characterized by multiple joint contractures. … More recently, FILIP1 loss-of-function variants were identified as a …

[5] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2022)
    DOI:10.21203/rs.3.rs-2121654/v1 https://europepmc.org/article/ppr/ppr556969
    snippet: … contractures and associated with homozygous putatively deleterious variants in the FILIP1 … Except for reduced fine motor skills due to finger contractures and gait impairment caused …
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[6] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.21203/rs.3.rs-2121654/v1 PMC10060356 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10060356/
    snippet: by F Schnabel · 2023 · Cited by 4 — Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures ...
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[7] FILIP1 (Arthrogryposis) - Gene
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/258/gene/FILIP1/
    snippet: Arg889Ter) gene and presenting with distal arthrogryposis with contractures ... gene: FILIP1 was added gene: FILIP1 was added to Arthrogryposis. Sources ...

[8] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.21203/rs.3.rs-2121654/v1 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Homozygous-loss-of-function-variants-in-FILIP1-with-Schnabel-Schuler/6713bf46949350571fddd797022d5ad5369508cd
    snippet: Prevalence of multiple congenital contractures including arthrogryposis multiplex congenita in Alberta, Canada, and a strategy for classification and coding.
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[9] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … and bilateral foot pronation as well as flexion contractures of the fingers (i–iv). Dysmorphic … di- or tetraplegia, congenital ichthyosis, seizures and speech defects (OMIM:270200). Further …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[10] Entry - #620775 - NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620775
    snippet: Congenital neuromuscular disorder with dysmorphic facies (NMDF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by impaired skeletal muscle ...