SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in LRRC7 lead to intellectual disability, autism, aggression and abnormal eating behaviors
    J Willim, D Woike, D Greene, S Das, K Pfeifer… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-52095-x
    snippet: … rare variants in LRRC7, coding for Densin-180, lead to a neurodevelopmental disorder in … As a third remarkable phenotype, we noted hyperphagia associated with obesity, starting …
    abstract: Members of the leucine rich repeat (LRR) and PDZ domain (LAP) protein family are essential for animal development and histogenesis. Densin-180, encoded by LRRC7, is the only LAP protein selectively expressed in neurons. Densin-180 is a postsynaptic scaffold at glutamatergic synapses, linking cytoskeletal elements with signalling proteins such as the α-subunit of Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. We have previously observed an association between high impact variants in LRRC7 and Intellectual Disability; also three individual cases with variants in LRRC7 had been described. We identify here 33 individuals (one of them previously described) with a dominant neurodevelopmental disorder due to heterozygous missense or loss-of-function variants in LRRC7. The clinical spectrum involves intellectual disability, autism, ADHD, aggression and, in several cases, hyperphagia-associated obesity. A PDZ domain variant interferes with synaptic targeting of Densin-180 in primary cultured neurons. Using in vitro systems (two hybrid, BioID, coimmunoprecipitation of tagged proteins from 293T cells) we identified new candidate interaction partners for the LRR domain, including protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), and observed that variants in the LRR reduced binding to these proteins. We conclude that LRRC7 encodes a major determinant of intellectual development and behaviour.

[2] Further Evidence for LRRC7 Gene Involvement in Neurodevelopmental Disorder: A Novel Variant
    S Khan, M Bilal, H Khan, Q Alam… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/jgm.70090 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jgm.70090
    snippet: … LRRC7 mRNA expression in the proband compared to control samples, while and 3D protein modeling revealed substantial changes in the LRRC7… , hyperphagia and class- II obesity—…
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are clinically heterogeneous conditions with complex etiologies and limited therapeutic options. Here, we investigated a proband presenting global developmental delay (GDD), tonic seizures, failure to thrive, mild microcephaly, intellectual disability (ID), and hypotonia.<h4>Methods</h4>Exome sequencing (ES), followed by Sanger sequencing, was performed for molecular diagnosis. Gene expression was assessed by reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), and 3D protein modeling was performed.<h4>Results</h4>ES revealed a novel de novo (heterozygous) missense variant [c.2660C>T; p.(Pro887Leu)], in LRRC7 (NM_001370785.2) gene, located in exon 18, which may contribute to the proband's phenotype. The identified variant was classified as variant of uncertain significant (VUS) according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Guidelines (ACMG). RT-qPCR showed reduced LRRC7 mRNA expression in the proband compared to control samples, while and 3D protein modeling revealed substantial changes in the LRRC7-secondary structure.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Using genetic, molecular, in silico, and expression analysis, we characterize a novel de novo-LRRC7 variant and describe its association with an NDD phenotype.

[3] The genetics of obesity: aetiology, prevention and therapy
    A Bonnefond, WS Bruner, SFA Grant, A Morandi… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s42255-026-01497-w
    snippet: … One extreme is monogenic obesity, where a single … as early-onset, severe obesity with marked hyperphagia, and often … a neurodevelopmental disorder that is associated with obesity in …
    abstract: Obesity is a complex, multifactorial condition with a strong genetic basis, encompassing monogenic, oligogenic and polygenic contributions. More than 1 billion people worldwide have obesity, including 150 million children. Since the discovery of leptin, over 85 monogenic forms have been identified, characterized by early-onset obesity with impaired appetite regulation, usually associated with neurodevelopmental (and other) phenotypes, making monogenic obesity mostly syndromic. However, genome-wide association studies have identified over 1,000 loci associated with weight variation. Advances in human genetics have translated into innovative therapeutic strategies. In particular, melanocortin 4 receptor agonists illustrate how genetic discoveries can target treatments, paving the way for precision medicine in obesity. These advances offer new opportunities to tailor treatments to the underlying genetic causes. In this Review, we highlight how genetic discoveries have deepened our understanding of obesity pathophysiology and accelerated precision medicine, and we discuss future strategies to enhance prevention and personalize patient care based on genetic background.

[4] Genetics of Craniosynostoses: What Is Important for the Neurosurgeon?
    F Tiberio, W Lattanzi (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/978-3-031-69386-1_3 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-69386-1_3
    snippet: … Neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia, craniofacial abnormalities, and seizures … RPE65), LRRC7 (leucine rich re-peat containing 7), SRSF11 (serine and arginine rich splicing fac…

[5] Variants in LRRC7 lead to intellectual disability, autism ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39256359/
    snippet: by J Willim · 2024 · Cited by 18 — ... LRRC7. The clinical spectrum involves intellectual disability, autism, ADHD, aggression and, in several cases, hyperphagia-associated obesity.
    abstract: Members of the leucine rich repeat (LRR) and PDZ domain (LAP) protein family are essential for animal development and histogenesis. Densin-180, encoded by LRRC7, is the only LAP protein selectively expressed in neurons. Densin-180 is a postsynaptic scaffold at glutamatergic synapses, linking cytoskeletal elements with signalling proteins such as the α-subunit of Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. We have previously observed an association between high impact variants in LRRC7 and Intellectual Disability; also three individual cases with variants in LRRC7 had been described. We identify here 33 individuals (one of them previously described) with a dominant neurodevelopmental disorder due to heterozygous missense or loss-of-function variants in LRRC7. The clinical spectrum involves intellectual disability, autism, ADHD, aggression and, in several cases, hyperphagia-associated obesity. A PDZ domain variant interferes with synaptic targeting of Densin-180 in primary cultured neurons. Using in vitro systems (two hybrid, BioID, coimmunoprecipitation of tagged proteins from 293T cells) we identified new candidate interaction partners for the LRR domain, including protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), and observed that variants in the LRR reduced binding to these proteins. We conclude that LRRC7 encodes a major determinant of intellectual development and behaviour.

[6] Gene: LRRC7 (Severe early-onset obesity)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/3764/gene/LRRC7/
    snippet: Hyperphagia and early-onset obesity is a common feature. ... Phenotypes for gene: LRRC7 were changed from neurodevelopmental disorder ...

[7] 621415 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621415
    snippet: ... LRRC7 gene (614453) on chromosome 1q31. ... Behavioral abnormalities included hyperphagia resulting in obesity, self-injury, and verbal aggression ...

[8] Chromosome 1p31. 1 Deletion: A Case With Developmental Delay, Hypotonia, Cryptorchidism, Abnormal Oral Frenulum, and Feet Deformity
    T Mikhailova, R Garg (2025)
    DOI:10.1155/crig/6152118 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/crig/6152118
    snippet: … Te typical clinical presentation includes intellectual disability, … contributes to a broad spectrum of clinical phenotypes, and a … the LRRC7 gene, resulting in the loss of 19 out of 25 exons. …
    abstract: Deletions within the chromosomal locus 1p31.1 are rare, with only a limited number of documented cases. The typical clinical presentation includes intellectual disability, failure to thrive, and craniofacial abnormalities. Some cases may also present with cardiac, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary malformations. Variability in deletion size contributes to a broad spectrum of clinical phenotypes, and a comprehensive understanding of the syndrome's manifestations is still evolving. This case study aims to provide additional insights into 1p31.1 microdeletion syndrome, enhancing knowledge of its genetic and phenotypic characteristics to improve recognition by clinicians. Here, we report a case featuring a 14.385 Mb deletion isolated to the 1p31.1 region, encompassing 41 genes. The deletion manifested with microcephaly, distinctive facial morphology, hypotonia, developmental delay, bilateral cryptorchidism, and flat feet. Notably, our case also exhibited congenital thickening of the lingual and labial frenulum, a trait not typically associated with this deletion.

[9] Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of MBOAT7‐related intellectual disability
    JE Jacher, N Roy, M Ghaziuddin… (2019)
    PMID:31282596 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.b.32749 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.b.32749
    snippet: … order (ADHD), aggressive outbursts, and hyperphagia included a karyotype, methylation … hypotonia throughout infancy that resolved in childhood. She had four simple partial seizures …
    abstract: MBOAT7 gene pathogenic variants are a newly discovered and rare cause for intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), seizures, truncal hypotonia, appendicular hypertonia, and below average head sizes (ranging from -1 to -3 standard deviations). There have been only 16 individuals previously reported who have MBOAT7-related intellectual disability, all of whom were younger than 10 years old and from consanguineous relationships. Thus, there is a lack of phenotypic information for adolescent and adult individuals with this disorder. Medical genetics and psychiatric evaluations in a 14-year-old female patient with a history of global developmental delay, intellectual disability, overgrowth with macrocephaly, metrorrhagia, seizures, basal ganglia hyperintensities, nystagmus, strabismus with amblyopia, ASD, anxiety, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), aggressive outbursts, and hyperphagia included a karyotype, methylation polymerase chain reaction for Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome, chromosome microarray, and whole exome sequencing (WES), ADOS2, and ADI-R. WES identified a homozygous, likely pathogenic variant in the MBOAT7 gene (c.855-2A>G). This is the oldest known patient with MBOAT7-related intellectual disability, whose unique features compared with previously described individuals include overgrowth with macrocephaly, metrorrhagia, ophthalmological abnormalities, basal ganglia hyperintensities, unspecified anxiety disorder, and ADHD; combined type; and hyperphagia with the absence of appendicular hypertonia and cortical atrophy. More individuals need to be identified in order to delineate the full clinical spectrum of this disorder.

[10] Variants in LRRC7 lead to intellectual disability, autism ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11387733 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11387733/
    snippet: by J Willim · 2024 · Cited by 18 — The core phenotype of these individuals consists of ID and delayed language development, in addition to ADHD, autism and seizures in several cases.
    abstract: Members of the leucine rich repeat (LRR) and PDZ domain (LAP) protein family are essential for animal development and histogenesis. Densin-180, encoded by LRRC7, is the only LAP protein selectively expressed in neurons. Densin-180 is a postsynaptic scaffold at glutamatergic synapses, linking cytoskeletal elements with signalling proteins such as the α-subunit of Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. We have previously observed an association between high impact variants in LRRC7 and Intellectual Disability; also three individual cases with variants in LRRC7 had been described. We identify here 33 individuals (one of them previously described) with a dominant neurodevelopmental disorder due to heterozygous missense or loss-of-function variants in LRRC7. The clinical spectrum involves intellectual disability, autism, ADHD, aggression and, in several cases, hyperphagia-associated obesity. A PDZ domain variant interferes with synaptic targeting of Densin-180 in primary cultured neurons. Using in vitro systems (two hybrid, BioID, coimmunoprecipitation of tagged proteins from 293T cells) we identified new candidate interaction partners for the LRR domain, including protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), and observed that variants in the LRR reduced binding to these proteins. We conclude that LRRC7 encodes a major determinant of intellectual development and behaviour.