SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … neurodevelopmental disorder… congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B…
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.

[2] KDM2B variants in the CxxC domain impair its DNA-binding ability and cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, MA Hadders… (2025)
    PMID:40420380 DOI:10.1093/hmg/ddaf082 https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/34/16/1353/8150966
    snippet: … with a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder possibly through … with a Duane anomaly of the right eye. Of note, tooth eruption was … workup of cardiac and renal ultrasound in each KDM2B-…
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[3] KDM2B‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A Case‐Series Supporting the CxxC Domain Phenotype With Emphasis on Ocular and Dermatologic Features
    A Gomes, Á Martín‐Rodríguez… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmga.70036 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmga.70036
    snippet: … with KDM2B- related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. … septal defects and unilateral renal agenesis. When integrated with …
    abstract: The KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a recently identified Mendelian disorder of the epigenetic machinery associated with pathogenic variants in KDM2B. Global developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, and systemic manifestations characterize the disorder. Variants in KDM2B that primarily affect the CxxC DNA-binding domain are strongly linked to a specific epigenetic signature. We present three children with KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder, each with a heterozygous variant in the CxxC domain of KDM2B. Patient 1 is a 2-year-old boy with developmental delay, solitary kidney, atrial septal defect, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl with global developmental delay, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties, hemangiomas, and myopic astigmatism. Patient 3 is a 5-year-old girl with autism, developmental delay, atrial septal defect, and ventricular septal defect, hypertrichosis, atopic dermatitis, and myopic astigmatism. Genetic analysis revealed a variant in KDM2B in each patient. Targeted methylation analysis for the epigenetic signature associated with the KDM2B-related syndrome revealed an abnormal methylation pattern consistent with a positive epigenetic signature of the disorder in individuals 2 and 3. These results provided supportive functional evidence for KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder in the context of the clinical findings and KDM2B variants. Our findings emphasize the value of integrating genomic and epigenomic analyses for variant interpretation. This case series reinforces the consistent phenotype of KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and highlights ocular and dermatologic manifestations as recurring features in affected individuals.

[4] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B‐Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder and the 12q24. 31 Microdeletion Syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, TC Hsieh, M Koetsier… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70169
    snippet: … with a distinct NDD with congenital cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities (OMIM # 621474) [14]. … Congenital heart defects were present in 12q24.31 (3/12) and …
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[5] Histone H2A monoubiquitination in neurodevelopmental disorders
    A Srivastava, B McGrath, SL Bielas (2017)
    PMID:28669576 DOI:10.1016/j.tig.2017.06.002 https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(17)30091-4
    snippet: … binding partners, including BCOR, KDM2B, E2F6, RYBP, and AUTS2 (… As an example, the H3K36me2 demethylase, KDM2B, … For many of the neurodevelopmental disorder genes that …
    abstract: Covalent histone modifications play an essential role in gene regulation and cellular specification required for multicellular organism development. Monoubiquitination of histone H2A (H2AUb1) is a reversible transcriptionally repressive mark. Exchange of histone H2A monoubiquitination and deubiquitination reflects the succession of transcriptional profiles during development required to produce cellular diversity from pluripotent cells. Germ-line pathogenic variants in components of the H2AUb1 regulatory axis are being identified as the genetic basis of congenital neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we review the human genetics findings coalescing on molecular mechanisms that alter the genome-wide distribution of this histone modification required for development.

[6] Entry - #621474 - NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621474
    snippet: NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER WITH CONGENITAL CARDIAC DEFECTS AND VARIABLE RENAL AND OCULAR ... Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its ...

[7] Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Congenital Cardiac ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/neurodevelopmental_disorder_with_congenital_cardiac_defects_and_variable_renal_and_ocular_abnormalities
    snippet: Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Congenital Cardiac Defects and Variable Renal and Ocular Abnormalities (NEDCRO) ... KDM2B. 4, Histone demethylase activity ...

[8] KDM2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/entities/KDM2B
    snippet: Neurodevelopmental disorder with congenital cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities, MIM# 621474. Green KDM2B in Congenital Heart Defect.

[9] neurodevelopmental disorder with congenital cardiac defects ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://zfin.org/DOID:0070694
    snippet: neurodevelopmental disorder with congenital cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities ... KDM2B gene on chromosome 12q24. (2); References.

[10] KDM2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/genes/KDM2B
    snippet: KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder; Neurodevelopmental disorder with congenital cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities, OMIM:621474 ...