SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … genes listed in Table 1, DDX17, DDX23 and DHX9 show high missense Z scores and pLI’s. … if missense changes located outside the QxxR and the motif V domains and truncating …

[2] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … with heterozygous, missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles … as cerebral anomalies, seizures, and neuromotor impairment. … DHX9 is used as the loading control. Immunoblotting on …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[3] Bi-allelic variants in neuronal adhesion molecule astrotactin 1 gene ASTN1 cause diverse neurodevelopmental disorders
    JM Levine, DG Calame, R Sangermano, H Du… (2026)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(25)00482-3
    snippet: … As individuals with rare protein-truncating and -damaging missense variants in monogenic … Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies …
    abstract: ASTN1 encodes astrotactin 1, a neuronal-glial ligand in the developing brain that promotes neuronal migration along radial glia in brain structures with laminar organization, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. In mouse models, disruption of Astn1 results in neuronal migration deficits, a mild reduction in cerebellar volume, and balance and coordination deficits. In humans, bi-allelic ASTN1 variants have been identified in nine individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) with or without brain malformations. ASTN1 additionally interacts with astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) to implement neuronal migration; ASTN2 deletions associate with NDDs with reduced penetrance. Here, we describe eighteen individuals with NDDs from twelve unrelated families with bi-allelic, ultra-rare, predicted damaging variants in ASTN1 and one individual with heterozygous variants in both ASTN1 and ASTN2. We expand the clinical phenotypic descriptions of ASTN1-related NDDs, which range from mild to profound developmental delay or intellectual disability and can be associated with autism, attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and epilepsy. Other recurrent abnormalities include dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, spasticity, and ataxia. Additionally, we add to the neuroradiographic phenotype of this condition, which can be normal, mildly dysmorphic (a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar dysgenesis), or severely dysmorphic (polymicrogyria and lissencephaly). Remarkably, three genetic models of multilocus pathogenic variation (MPV), including tri-allelic, double heterozygous, and double homozygous due to distributive absence of heterozygosity (AOH), were observed. This ASTN1 allelic series characterizes the consequences of perturbations in radial-glia-guided neuronal migration in humans, the phenotypic spectrum of ASTN1-related NDDs, and the contribution of MPV to the genetic basis of NDDs.

[4] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … , heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant … NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated … Given that transcripts containing protein-truncating DHX9 …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[5] ATP1A3 regulates protein synthesis for mitochondrial stability under heat stress
    F Fujii, H Kanemasa, S Okuzono… (2024)
    DOI:10.1242/dmm.050574/3467025/dmm050574.pdf https://journals.biologists.com/dmm/article-pdf/doi/10.1242/dmm.050574/3467025/dmm050574.pdf
    snippet: … R756C variant are more vulnerable to heat stress than those with truncating mutations, irrespective of functional deficits in RNA translation or mitochondrial stability in neurons. …

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — Functional studies show that DHX9 variants disrupt DHX9 cellular localization and helicase activity and increase R-loops and double-stranded DNA ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text
    snippet: Missense and loss-of-function constraint among DDX/DHX genes. The DDX/DHX superfamily consists of 58 paralogous genes underlying at least 15 ...

[8] Pathogenic variation in R-loop helicase gene DHX9 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mdaconference.org/abstract-library/pathogenic-variation-in-r-loop-helicase-gene-dhx9-causes-axonal-neuropathy-and-neurodevelopmental-disorders/
    snippet: The gene DHX9 exhibits the highest mutational constraint to loss-of-function (LoF) and missense variation of all DDX-DHX helicases; it is also robustly ...

[9] DHX9 - New Candidate Gene for Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.infrafrontier.eu/news/dhx9-new-candidate-gene-for-neurodevelopmental-disorders-and-charcot-marie-tooth-disease/
    snippet: The researchers discovered that the patients had mutations of the gene DHX9, which disrupted the gene's normal function. This is the first time ...
    abstract: Recurrent high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) and endometrial cancer remain major clinical challenges with limited effective treatment options. DExH-box helicase 9 (DHX9), a DNA/RNA helicase essential for genomic stability, has not yet been explored as a therapeutic target in gynecologic cancers. In this study, we show that a selective DHX9 inhibitor (DHX9i) suppresses proliferation in a subset of HGSOC and endometrial cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, chromosomal instability, and mitotic failure. This effect was independent of microsatellite instability status and prior resistance to platinum or PARP inhibitors. Genomic analysis indicated that DHX9i resistance was unlikely to be driven by single-gene mutations but was instead associated with copy-number alterations in mitotic spindle and microtubule-regulating genes in both HGSOC and endometrial cancer. Transcriptomic profiling further revealed consistent alterations in microtubule- and spindle-associated pathways in DHX9i-resistant models following DHX9i treatment. Mechanistically, DHX9i induced mitotic defects in DHX9i-sensitive models, whereas resistant lines maintained mitotic integrity. Given the convergence of resistance-associated features on microtubule-related pathways, we combined DHX9i with the microtubule-stabilizing agent paclitaxel to enhance mitotic stress. This combination triggered mitotic disruption and enhanced cytotoxicity in DHX9i-resistant cells. In vivo, the combination led to sustained tumor regression and prolonged survival in both DHX9i-sensitive and DHX9i-resistant models without notable toxicity. Overall, our findings define genomic, transcriptomic, and phenotypic characteristics associated with differential responses to DHX9i and support the clinical evaluation of the DHX9i-paclitaxel combination as a therapeutic strategy in recurrent gynecologic cancers.

[10] Deep phenotyping and natural history of DHX9-related ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://ern-ithaca.eu/our-research-activities/calls-for-collaboration/deep-phenotyping-and-natural-history-of-dhx9-related-disorder/
    snippet: DHX9 (OMIM* 620988). Abstract. In 2023 we identified de novo missense and loss-of-function variants in the RNA helicase gene DHX9 in 14 individuals with ...