SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder and are associated with impaired mRNA processing
    A Fliedner, P Kirchner, A Wiesener… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30228-7
    snippet: … de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental … Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient …
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[2] Further delineation of the SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder
    CM Schmid, A Gregor, A Ruiz… (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01760-2
    snippet: … de novo truncating variants in SCAF4 were recently identified in 18 individuals with variable neurodevelopmental … was a relatively large number of inherited SCAF4 variants (13 cases). …
    abstract: While mostly de novo truncating variants in SCAF4 were recently identified in 18 individuals with variable neurodevelopmental phenotypes, knowledge on the molecular and clinical spectrum is still limited. We assembled data on 50 novel individuals with SCAF4 variants ascertained via GeneMatcher and personal communication. With detailed evaluation of clinical data, in silico predictions and structural modeling, we further characterized the molecular and clinical spectrum of the autosomal dominant SCAF4-associated neurodevelopmental disorder. The molecular spectrum comprises 25 truncating, eight splice-site and five missense variants. While all other truncating variants were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, significance of one C-terminal truncating variant, one splice-site variant and the missense variants remained unclear. Three missense variants in the CTD-interacting domain of SCAF4 were predicted to destabilize the domain. Twenty-three variants occurred de novo, and variants were inherited in 13 cases. Frequent clinical findings were mild developmental delay with speech impairment, seizures, and skeletal abnormalities such as clubfoot, scoliosis or hip dysplasia. Cognitive abilities ranged from normal IQ to severe intellectual disability (ID), with borderline to mild ID in the majority of individuals. Our study confirms the role of SCAF4 variants in neurodevelopmental disorders and further delineates the associated clinical phenotype.

[3] Understanding rare variant contributions to autism: lessons from dystrophin-deficient model
    CIS Costa, L Madanelo, JYT Wang… (2025)
    PMID:40050609 DOI:10.1038/s41525-025-00469-5 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41525-025-00469-5
    snippet: … In these models, both inherited or de novo rare and common … The pathogenic variants in EBF3 and SCAF4 were DNVs, … the impact of RRVs on the neurodevelopmental phenotype of 83 …
    abstract: Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophy are dystrophinopathies with a prevalence of 1:5000-6000 males, caused by pathogenic variants in DMD. These conditions are often accompanied by neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) like autism (ASD; ~20%) and intellectual disability (ID; ~30%). However, their low penetrance in dystrophinopathies suggests additional contributing factors. In our study, 83 individuals with dystrophinopathies were clinically evaluated and categorized based on ASD (36 individuals), ID risk (12 individuals), or controls (35 individuals). Exome sequencing analysis revealed an enrichment of risk de novo variants (DNVs) in ASD-DMD individuals (adjusted p value = 0.0356), with the number of DNVs correlating with paternal age (p value = 0.0133). Additionally, DMD-ASD individuals showed a higher average of rare risk variants (RRVs) compared to DMD-Controls (adjusted p value = 0.0285). Gene ontology analysis revealed an enrichment of extracellular matrix-related genes, especially collagens, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome genes in ASD-DMD and DMD-ID groups. These findings support an oligogenic model for ASD in dystrophinopathies, highlighting the importance of investigating homogenized samples to elucidate ASD's genetic architecture.

[4] Rolle des Transkriptionsregulators PHF6 und des Transkriptionsterminators SCAF4 bei Entwicklungsstörungen
    A Fliedner
    https://open.fau.de/bitstreams/f40a0227-9d48-4595-93f1-bfef2148013e/download
    snippet: … males with inherited X-linked recessive variants and affected females with de novo variants in … This is consistent with the neurodevelopmental phenotype and cognitive impairment in …

[5] SCAF4‐related syndromic intellectual disability
    LML Carvalho, CF Pinto… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63032 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63032
    snippet: … eight of which were de novo and one inherited. An additional … Here, we report a de novo frameshift SCAF4 variant mapped … Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder and …
    abstract: The causal link between variants in the SCAF4 gene and a syndromic form of intellectual disability (ID) was established in 2020 by Fliedner et al. Since then, no additional cases have been reported. We performed exome sequencing in a 16-year-old Brazilian male presenting with ID, epilepsy, behavioral problems, speech impairment, facial dysmorphisms, heart malformations, and obesity. A de novo pathogenic variant [SCAF4(NM_020706.2):c.374_375dup(p.Glu126LeufsTer20)] was identified. This is the second study reporting the involvement of SCAF4 in syndromic ID, and the description of the patient's clinical features contributes to defining the phenotypic spectrum of this recently described Mendelian disorder.

[6] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC7477272 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7477272/
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. ... SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[7] Variants in SCAF4 Cause a Neurodevelopmental Disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929720302287
    snippet: by A Fliedner · 2020 · Cited by 30 — Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[8] Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:32730804 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.019 https://www.baylorgenetics.com/publication/variants-in-scaf4-cause-a-neurodevelopmental-disorder-and-are-associated-with-impaired-mrna-processing/?print=print
    snippet: Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. ... SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that ...
    abstract: RNA polymerase II interacts with various other complexes and factors to ensure correct initiation, elongation, and termination of mRNA transcription. One of these proteins is SR-related CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4), which is important for correct usage of polyA sites for mRNA termination. Using exome sequencing and international matchmaking, we identified nine likely pathogenic germline variants in SCAF4 including two splice-site and seven truncating variants, all residing in the N-terminal two thirds of the protein. Eight of these variants occurred de novo, and one was inherited. Affected individuals demonstrated a variable neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mild intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral abnormalities, and various skeletal and structural anomalies. Paired-end RNA sequencing on blood lymphocytes of SCAF4-deficient individuals revealed a broad deregulation of more than 9,000 genes and significant differential splicing of more than 2,900 genes, indicating an important role of SCAF4 in mRNA processing. Knockdown of the SCAF4 ortholog CG4266 in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor function, learning, and short-term memory. Furthermore, we observed an increased number of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, representing large glutamatergic synapses. These observations indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development and function and support the implication of SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In summary, our data show that heterozygous, likely gene-disrupting variants in SCAF4 are causative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired mRNA processing.

[9] A novel nonsense mutation in SCAF4 associated with ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.3389/fgene.2025.1487352/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/genetics/articles/10.3389/fgene.2025.1487352/full
    snippet: de novo heterozygous POLR2A ... ). Variants in SCAF4 cause a neurodevelopmental disorder and are associated with impaired mRNA processing ...

[10] Roles of Transcriptional Regulator PHF6 and Transcriptional Terminator SCAF4 in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
    A Fliedner (2021)
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/551ce428590f754704e579472ecaea1a/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2026366&diss=y
    snippet: … und zwei Spleiß-Varianten, von denen acht de novo auftraten. … and affected females with de novo variants in PHF6 are … “female” variants might have more severe effects on protein …