SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Iron pathophysiology in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    S Levi, A Cozzi, P Santambrogio (2019)
    PMID:31456210 DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_9 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_9
    snippet: … characteristic of generating severe iron accumulation in the basal ganglia of the patients’ … and did not display signs of iron accumulation [13]. The GTPBP2 gene encodes a GTP-binding …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of seriously devastating and life-threatening rare monogenic diseases characterized by focal iron accumulation in the brain. The main symptoms of NBIA comprise progressive movement disorder, often including painful dystonia, parkinsonism, mental disability, and early death. Currently, a single established therapy is not available to reverse the progression of these debilitating disorders. The complexity of NBIA emerged from the identification of various causative genes, and up to 15 genes have been identified to date. Although the NBIA genes are involved in different cellular biochemical pathways, they show the common characteristic of generating severe iron accumulation in the basal ganglia of the patients' brains. Thus, the molecular events that lead to brain iron overload and their important roles in the pathophysiology of the diseases are not easy to identify and are poorly understood. This review summarizes the current knowledge on NBIA disorders, with a particular focus on the data describing the role of iron in the pathogenic mechanisms.

[2] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation disorders: valuable models aimed at understanding the pathogenesis of iron deposition
    S Levi, V Tiranti (2019)
    PMID:30744104 DOI:10.3390/ph12010027 https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8247/12/1/27
    snippet: … group since some patients show iron accumulation in basal ganglia at MRI analysis [100]. … corpus callosum without signs of iron accumulation [117]. The GTPBP2 is located on human …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a set of neurodegenerative disorders, which includes very rare monogenetic diseases. They are heterogeneous in regard to the onset and the clinical symptoms, while the have in common a specific brain iron deposition in the region of the basal ganglia that can be visualized by radiological and histopathological examinations. Nowadays, 15 genes have been identified as causative for NBIA, of which only two code for iron-proteins, while all the other causative genes codify for proteins not involved in iron management. Thus, how iron participates to the pathogenetic mechanism of most NBIA remains unclear, essentially for the lack of experimental models that fully recapitulate the human phenotype. In this review we reported the recent data on new models of these disorders aimed at highlight the still scarce knowledge of the pathogenesis of iron deposition.

[3] On the complexity of clinical and molecular bases of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    C Tello, A Darling, V Lupo, B Pérez‐Dueñas… (2018)
    PMID:28542792 DOI:10.1111/cge.13057 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13057
    snippet: … iron accumulation, especially within the basal ganglia and can be … a Mutations in GTPBP2 or SCP2 cause a NBIA phenotype.… MRI shows a distinctive pattern of brain iron accumulation, …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of inherited heterogeneous neurodegenerative rare disorders. These patients present with dystonia, spasticity, parkinsonism and neuropsychiatric disturbances, along with brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evidence of iron accumulation. In sum, they are devastating disorders and to date, there is no specific treatment. Ten NBIA genes are accepted: PANK2, PLA2G6, C19orf12, COASY, FA2H, ATP13A2, WDR45, FTL, CP, and DCAF17; and nonetheless, a relevant percentage of patients remain without genetic diagnosis, suggesting that other novel NBIA genes remain to be discovered. Overlapping complex clinical pictures render an accurate differential diagnosis difficult. Little is known about the pathophysiology of NBIAs. The reported NBIA genes take part in a variety of pathways: CoA synthesis, lipid and iron metabolism, autophagy, and membrane remodeling. The next-generation sequencing revolution has achieved relevant advances in genetics of Mendelian diseases and provide new genes for NBIAs, which are investigated according to 2 main strategies: genes involved in disorders with similar phenotype and genes that play a role in a pathway of interest. To achieve an effective therapy for NBIA patients, a better understanding of the biological process underlying disease is crucial, moving toward a new age of precision medicine.

[4] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    A Batla, C Gaddipati (2019)
    PMC6613411 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6613411/
    snippet: … and the evaluation includes MRI brain T2* weighted imaging which reveal symmetrical iron deposition in bilateral globus pallidi and other basal ganglia. The T2 * imaging pattern of iron …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.

[5] … : Primary Mitochondrial and Lipid Metabolism Failure with Secondary Iron Accumulation and Lipid Peroxidation in Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation
    A Vijeev, S Basha, SS Nadig, K Agarwal… (2026)
    PMID:42610670 DOI:10.1080/17590914.2026.2717255 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17590914.2026.2717255
    snippet: … described disorders such as GTPBP2- and REPS1-related … in 17 individuals, and basal ganglia iron deposition was … or occur without early basal ganglia iron accumulation. Additional …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) comprises a genetically heterogeneous group of rare movement disorders characterized by progressive neurodegeneration and selective basal ganglia iron deposition. Recent discoveries have fundamentally reshaped the understanding of NBIA, indicating that defects in coenzyme A metabolism, mitochondrial bioenergetics, lipid remodeling, autophagy-lysosomal pathways, and ferroptosis precede and promote secondary iron dyshomeostasis rather than resulting from primary abnormalities in iron metabolism. This review integrates recent mechanistic and translational evidence (2020-2026) across both common and underrepresented NBIA subtypes, including pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, phospholipase A2-associated neurodegeneration, COASY protein-associated neurodegeneration, mitochondrial enoyl-CoA reductase protein-associated neurodegeneration, mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration, β-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration, fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration, neuroferritinopathy, and mitochondrial DNA-associated forms. Unlike previous reviews, this synthesis consolidates findings from patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cell neuronal and glial models, compartment-specific iron localization, advanced neuroimaging biomarkers, and emerging therapeutic strategies within a unified mechanistic framework. Collectively, the evidence supports a paradigm in which mitochondrial dysfunction and lipid metabolic failure initiate disease progression, whereas iron accumulation amplifies oxidative injury and lipid peroxidation, thereby increasing ferroptotic cell death and neuronal degeneration, providing an updated foundation for biomarker discovery, mechanistically informed therapeutic development, and precision medicine approaches in NBIA.

[6] Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA)
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:42429179 DOI:10.1002/mdc3.70736 https://www.malacards.org/card/neurodegeneration_with_brain_iron_accumulation
    snippet: A neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive iron accumulation in the basal ganglia ... GTPBP2 · SCP2 · VPS13A · REPS1 · AP4M1 · CIAO1 · CRAT · FTH1 ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.

[7] Towards Precision Therapies for Inherited Disorders of ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34909266 DOI:10.5334/tohm.661 https://tremorjournal.org/articles/10.5334/tohm.661
    snippet: by RVV Spaull · 2021 · Cited by 33 — ... GTPBP2 [57, 58], AP4M1 [59], CRAT [16] ... It significantly reduced iron accumulation on quantitative serial MRI assessment in a subset of participants.
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) disorders comprise a group of rare but devastating inherited neurological diseases with unifying features of progressive cognitive and motor decline, and increased iron deposition in the basal ganglia. Although at present there are no proven disease-modifying treatments, the severe nature of these monogenic disorders lends to consideration of personalized medicine strategies, including targeted gene therapy. In this review we summarize the progress and future direction towards precision therapies for NBIA disorders.<h4>Methods</h4>This review considered all relevant publications up to April 2021 using a systematic search strategy of PubMed and clinical trials databases.<h4>Results</h4>We review what is currently known about the underlying pathophysiology of NBIA disorders, common NBIA disease pathways, and how this knowledge has influenced current management strategies and clinical trial design. The safety profile, efficacy and clinical outcome of clinical studies are reviewed. Furthermore, the potential for future therapeutic approaches is also discussed.<h4>Discussion</h4>Therapeutic options in NBIAs remain very limited, with no proven disease-modifying treatments at present. However, a number of different approaches are currently under development with increasing focus on targeted precision therapies. Recent advances in the field give hope that novel strategies, such as gene therapy, gene editing and substrate replacement therapies are both scientifically and financially feasible for these conditions.<h4>Highlights</h4>This article provides an up-to-date review of the current literature about Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA), with a focus on disease pathophysiology, current and previously trialed therapies, and future treatments in development, including consideration of potential genetic therapy approaches.

[8] Syndromes of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:22704258 DOI:10.1016/j.spen.2012.03.005 https://neupsykey.com/chapter-16-syndromes-of-neurodegeneration-with-brain-iron-accumulation/
    snippet: Late-onset cases may lack signs of iron accumulation and MRI ... In GTPBP2–associated neurodegeneration, brain MRI shows atrophy of the cerebellar ...
    abstract: In parallel to recent developments of genetic techniques, understanding of the syndromes of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation has grown considerably. The acknowledged clinical spectrum continues to broaden, with age-dependent presentations being recognized. Postmortem brain examination of genetically confirmed cases has demonstrated Lewy bodies and/or tangles in some forms, bridging the gap to more common neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease. In this review, the major forms of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) are summarized, concentrating on clinical findings and molecular insights. In addition to pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) and phospholipase A2-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN), fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration (FAHN) NBIA, mitochondrial protein-associated neurodegeneration, Kufor-Rakeb disease, aceruloplasminemia, neuroferritinopathy, and SENDA syndrome (static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood) are discussed.

[9] Clinical delineation of GTPBP2‐associated neuro‐ectodermal syndrome: Report of two new families and review of the literature
    MT Carter, S Venkateswaran… (2019)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.13523 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.13523
    snippet: … Here, we describe three additional patients, two children and … by neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIAs), … the onset of brain iron accumulation. It is unclear whether the …
    abstract: The GTPBP2 gene encodes a guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein of unknown function. Biallelic loss-of-function variants in the GTPBP2 gene have been previously reported in association with a neuro-ectodermal clinical presentation in six individuals from four unrelated families. Here, we provide detailed descriptions of three additional individuals from two unrelated families in the context of the previous literature. Both families carry nonsense variants in GTPBP2: homozygous p.(Arg470*) and compound heterozygous p.(Arg432*)/p.(Arg131*). Key features of this clinically recognizable condition include prenatal onset microcephaly, tone abnormalities, and movement disorders, epilepsy, dysmorphic features, retinal dysfunction, ectodermal dysplasia, and brain iron accumulation. Our findings suggest that some aspects of the clinical presentation appear to be age-related; brain iron accumulation may appear only after childhood, and the ectodermal findings and peripheral neuropathy are most prominent in older individuals. In addition, we present prenatal and neonatal findings as well as the first Caucasian and black African families with GTPBP2 biallelic variants. The individuals described herein provide valuable additional phenotypic information about this rare, novel, and progressive neuroectodermal condition.

[10] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    SA Schneider (2025)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780443191763000558
    snippet: … Age of onset is in childhood in most forms of NBIA. Symptoms … ataxia and deafness with brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) … GTPBP2 mutations 20 are another rare cause of NBIA, …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.