SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] SPTAN1 encephalopathy: distinct phenotypes and genotypes
    J Tohyama, M Nakashima, S Nabatame… (2015)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/jhg20155
    snippet: … to dominant negative effects and these specific phenotypes. … or haploinsufficiency of SPTAN1 results in different phenotypes… the phenotype spectrum and involvement of other organs. …
    abstract: Recent progress in genetic analysis reveals that a significant proportion of cryptogenic epileptic encephalopathies are single-gene disorders. Mutations in numerous genes for early-onset epileptic encephalopathies have been rapidly identified, including in SPTAN1, which encodes α-II spectrin. The aim of this review is to delineate SPTAN1 encephalopathy as a distinct clinical syndrome. To date, a total of seven epileptic patients with four different in-frame SPTAN1 mutations have been identified. The major clinical features of SPTAN1 mutations include epileptic encephalopathy with hypsarrhythmia, no visual attention, acquired microcephaly, spastic quadriplegia and severe intellectual disability. Brainstem and cerebellar atrophy and cerebral hypomyelination, as observed by magnetic resonance imaging, are specific hallmarks of this condition. A milder variant is characterized by generalized epilepsy with pontocerebellar atrophy. Only in-frame SPTAN1 mutations in the last two spectrin repeats in the C-terminal region lead to dominant negative effects and these specific phenotypes. The last two spectrin repeats are required for α/β spectrin heterodimer associations and the mutations can alter heterodimer formation between the two spectrins. From these data we suggest that SPTAN1 encephalopathy is a distinct clinical syndrome owing to specific SPTAN1 mutations. It is important that this syndrome is recognized by pediatric neurologists to enable proper diagnostic work-up for patients.

[2] Nonsense mutations in alpha-II spectrin in three families with juvenile onset hereditary motor neuropathy
    D Beijer, T Deconinck, JL De Bleecker, MT Dotti… (2019)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/142/9/2605/5536902
    snippet: … Previously, dominant-negative αII-spectrin gene mutations … SPTAN1 is a gene initially associated with a spectrum of … (dominant-negative, gain-of-function and haploinsufficiency) is …
    abstract: Distal hereditary motor neuropathies are a rare subgroup of inherited peripheral neuropathies hallmarked by a length-dependent axonal degeneration of lower motor neurons without significant involvement of sensory neurons. We identified patients with heterozygous nonsense mutations in the αII-spectrin gene, SPTAN1, in three separate dominant hereditary motor neuropathy families via next-generation sequencing. Variable penetrance was noted for these mutations in two of three families, and phenotype severity differs greatly between patients. The mutant mRNA containing nonsense mutations is broken down by nonsense-mediated decay and leads to reduced protein levels in patient cells. Previously, dominant-negative αII-spectrin gene mutations were described as causal in a spectrum of epilepsy phenotypes.

[3] De novo SPTAN1 mutation in axonal sensorimotor neuropathy and developmental disorder
    E Ylikallio, N Ritari, M Sainio, J Toppila, S Kivirikko… (2020)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/143/12/e104/5989775
    snippet: … This case is important as it gives additional confirmation to the association of variants in SPTAN1 with neuropathy and provides new insights into the phenotypic spectrum related to this …

[4] Loss of Function SPTAN1 Variants Result in Ataxia and Intellectual Disability
    PN Lu, C Melton, B Dupont, JR Jones, F Abidi… (2025)
    PMID:39988451 DOI:10.1111/cge.14732 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.14732
    snippet: … stemming from Sptan1 haploinsufficiency have also been described … More recent reports describe a wider spectrum of clinical … pared to dominant negative forms of SPTAN1- associated …
    abstract: SPTAN1 mutations have been reported in association with autosomal dominant early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 5. Individuals present with early-onset seizures and profound intellectual disability. Recent reports suggest a wider spectrum with later-onset seizures and milder developmental delay. Here we describe two patients with loss-of-function variants in SPTAN1. One patient has ataxia and mild intellectual disability stemming from a de novo homozygous p.(Gln1448Pro) variant associated with uniparental disomy 9. The second patient, carrying a heterozygous p.(Asn1839del) allele, exhibits more substantial motor issues, developmental delay, and seizures. Ectopically expressed wild-type or variant-containing forms of sptan1 in zebrafish indicate both variants create loss-of-function alleles, with the p.(Gln1448Pro) likely being hypomorphic. This conclusion is supported by reduced protein abundance and localization of Sptan1 variants in axons of developing embryos. Further, unlike wild-type sptan1, analysis of the p.(Gln1448Pro) variant showed it failed to restore voltage-gated sodium channel localization in sptan1-null axons. Additional behavioral analyses show supplementation with the amino acid D-aspartate improved motility in sptan1-null zebrafish, supporting its use for α-II spectrin-associated motor dysfunction.

[5] Spectrinopathies in rare neurological and neuromuscular diseases: large-scale efforts towards the identification of novel molecular causes
    L Van de Vondel (2024)
    https://repository.uantwerpen.be/link/irua/206208
    snippet: … the full SPTAN1 gene is causative of a myopathy phenotype. … defines the SPTAN1 associated phenotypical spectrum to … can be either dominant negative or lead to haploinsufficiency. …

[6] Graphical representation of SPTAN1 with mutations ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Graphical-representation-of-SPTAN1-with-mutations-identified-in-epilepsy-and-HMN_fig2_334655241
    snippet: Here, we confirm the role of SPTAN1 haploinsufficiency as a cause of distal myopathy. ... Another mechanism, recognized in numerous dominant-negative SPTAN1 ...

[7] Dominant-negative mutations in alpha-II spectrin cause West ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:20493457 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.013 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Dominant-negative-mutations-in-alpha-II-spectrin-Saitsu-Tohyama/afdb2e3718867cbf31c6a2e0b6415c58dcb59ae5
    snippet: ... haploinsufficiency of STXBP1 was involved in ... Dominant-negative ... Delineating SPTAN1 associated phenotypes: from isolated epilepsy to encephalopathy with ...
    abstract: A de novo 9q33.3-q34.11 microdeletion involving STXBP1 has been found in one of four individuals (group A) with early-onset West syndrome, severe hypomyelination, poor visual attention, and developmental delay. Although haploinsufficiency of STXBP1 was involved in early infantile epileptic encephalopathy in a previous different cohort study (group B), no mutations of STXBP1 were found in two of the remaining three subjects of group A (one was unavailable). We assumed that another gene within the deletion might contribute to the phenotype of group A. SPTAN1 encoding alpha-II spectrin, which is essential for proper myelination in zebrafish, turned out to be deleted. In two subjects, an in-frame 3 bp deletion and a 6 bp duplication in SPTAN1 were found at the initial nucleation site of the alpha/beta spectrin heterodimer. SPTAN1 was further screened in six unrelated individuals with WS and hypomyelination, but no mutations were found. Recombinant mutant (mut) and wild-type (WT) alpha-II spectrin could assemble heterodimers with beta-II spectrin, but alpha-II (mut)/beta-II spectrin heterodimers were thermolabile compared with the alpha-II (WT)/beta-II heterodimers. Transient expression in mouse cortical neurons revealed aggregation of alpha-II (mut)/beta-II and alpha-II (mut)/beta-III spectrin heterodimers, which was also observed in lymphoblastoid cells from two subjects with in-frame mutations. Clustering of ankyrinG and voltage-gated sodium channels at axon initial segment (AIS) was disturbed in relation to the aggregates, together with an elevated action potential threshold. These findings suggest that pathological aggregation of alpha/beta spectrin heterodimers and abnormal AIS integrity resulting from SPTAN1 mutations were involved in pathogenesis of infantile epilepsy.

[8] Delineating SPTAN1 associated phenotypes: from isolated epilepsy to encephalopathy with progressive brain atrophy
    S Syrbe, FL Harms, E Parrini, M Montomoli, U Mütze… (2017)
    PMID:29050398 DOI:10.1093/brain/awx195 https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/140/9/2322/4096697
    snippet: … included seven unique missense variants and … SPTAN1 mutations are indicated in black or red based on the severity of the patient's phenotype (red: infantile epileptic encephalopathy…
    abstract: De novo in-frame deletions and duplications in the SPTAN1 gene, encoding the non-erythrocyte αII spectrin, have been associated with severe West syndrome with hypomyelination and pontocerebellar atrophy. We aimed at comprehensively delineating the phenotypic spectrum associated with SPTAN1 mutations. Using different molecular genetic techniques, we identified 20 patients with a pathogenic or likely pathogenic SPTAN1 variant and reviewed their clinical, genetic and imaging data. SPTAN1 de novo alterations included seven unique missense variants and nine in-frame deletions/duplications of which 12 were novel. The recurrent three-amino acid duplication p.(Asp2303_Leu2305dup) occurred in five patients. Our patient cohort exhibited a broad spectrum of neurodevelopmental phenotypes, comprising six patients with mild to moderate intellectual disability, with or without epilepsy and behavioural disorders, and 14 patients with infantile epileptic encephalopathy, of which 13 had severe neurodevelopmental impairment and four died in early childhood. Imaging studies suggested that the severity of neurological impairment and epilepsy correlates with that of structural abnormalities as well as the mutation type and location. Out of seven patients harbouring mutations outside the α/β spectrin heterodimerization domain, four had normal brain imaging and three exhibited moderately progressive brain and/or cerebellar atrophy. Twelve of 13 patients with mutations located within the spectrin heterodimer contact site exhibited severe and progressive brain, brainstem and cerebellar atrophy, with hypomyelination in most. We used fibroblasts from five patients to study spectrin aggregate formation by Triton-X extraction and immunocytochemistry followed by fluorescence microscopy. αII/βII aggregates and αII spectrin in the insoluble protein fraction were observed in fibroblasts derived from patients with the mutations p.(Glu2207del), p.(Asp2303_Leu2305dup) and p.(Arg2308_Met2309dup), all falling in the nucleation site of the α/β spectrin heterodimer region. Molecular modelling of the seven SPTAN1 amino acid changes provided preliminary evidence for structural alterations of the A-, B- and/or C-helices within each of the mutated spectrin repeats. We conclude that SPTAN1-related disorders comprise a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental phenotypes ranging from mild to severe and progressive. Spectrin aggregate formation in fibroblasts with mutations in the α/β heterodimerization domai

[9] FROM MISSING GENETICS TO SHARED DISEASE MECHANISMS
    J De Winter, L Van de Vondel… (2025)
    https://repository.uantwerpen.be/docstore/d:irua:29211#page=152
    snippet: … a similar phenotype and all likely lead to a loss of function. … SPTAN1 variants in three distinct groups: 1) severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathies, associated with missense …

[10] De Novo and Dominantly Inherited SPTAN1 Mutations Cause Spastic Paraplegia and Cerebellar Ataxia
    L Van de Vondel, J De Winter, D Beijer… (2022)
    PMID:35150594 DOI:10.1002/mds.28959 https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/mds.28959
    snippet: … causing a hereditary motor neuropathy (HMN) phenotype.An … (iPSCs) of a patient with epileptic encephalopathy; however, this … Three other de novo missense mutations in SPTAN1 are …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Pathogenic variants in SPTAN1 have been linked to a remarkably broad phenotypical spectrum. Clinical presentations include epileptic syndromes, intellectual disability, and hereditary motor neuropathy.<h4>Objectives</h4>We investigated the role of SPTAN1 variants in rare neurological disorders such as ataxia and spastic paraplegia.<h4>Methods</h4>We screened 10,000 NGS datasets across two international consortia and one local database, indicative of the level of international collaboration currently required to identify genes causative for rare disease. We performed in silico modeling of the identified SPTAN1 variants.<h4>Results</h4>We describe 22 patients from 14 families with five novel SPTAN1 variants. Of six patients with cerebellar ataxia, four carry a de novo SPTAN1 variant and two show a sporadic inheritance. In this group, one variant (p.Lys2083del) is recurrent in four patients. Two patients have novel de novo missense mutations (p.Arg1098Cys, p.Arg1624Cys) associated with cerebellar ataxia, in one patient accompanied by intellectual disability and epilepsy. We furthermore report a recurrent missense mutation (p.Arg19Trp) in 15 patients with spastic paraplegia from seven families with a dominant inheritance pattern in four and a de novo origin in one case. One further patient carrying a de novo missense mutation (p.Gln2205Pro) has a complex spastic ataxic phenotype. Through protein modeling we show that mutated amino acids are located at crucial interlinking positions, interconnecting the three-helix bundle of a spectrin repeat.<h4>Conclusions</h4>We show that SPTAN1 is a relevant candidate gene for ataxia and spastic paraplegia. We suggest that for the mutations identified in this study, disruption of the interlinking of spectrin helices could be a key feature of the pathomechanism. © 2022 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.