SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Diagnosis of TBC1D32‐associated conditions: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of a complex ciliopathy
    SC Harris, K Chong, D Chitayat… (2023)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63150 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63150
    snippet: … Index probands were identified through an ongoing prenatal exome … TBC1D32 is involved in the development and function of cilia … with TBC1D32 variants, including a severe prenatal …
    abstract: Exome sequencing is a powerful tool in prenatal and postnatal genetics and can help identify novel candidate genes critical to human development. We describe seven unpublished probands with rare likely pathogenic variants or variants of uncertain significance that segregate with recessive disease in TBC1D32, including four fetal probands in three unrelated pedigrees and three pediatric probands in unrelated pedigrees. We also report clinical comparisons with seven previously published patients. Index probands were identified through an ongoing prenatal exome sequencing study and through an online data sharing platform (Gene Matcher™). A literature review was also completed. TBC1D32 is involved in the development and function of cilia and is expressed in the developing hypothalamus and pituitary gland. We provide additional data to expand the phenotype correlated with TBC1D32 variants, including a severe prenatal phenotype associated with life-limiting congenital anomalies.

[2] Genetic etiology of congenital hypopituitarism
    DJ Cullingford, A Siafarikas, CS Choong (2022)
    https://europepmc.org/article/nbk/nbk586145
    snippet: Congenital hypopituitarism refers to a deficiency of one or more pituitary hormones resulting from issues in fetal development. Embryological pituitary development involves a complex …
    abstract: Congenital hypopituitarism refers to a deficiency of one or more pituitary hormones resulting from issues in fetal development. Embryological pituitary development involves a complex interplay of transcription factors, extrinsic and intrinsic to the oral ectoderm and neuroectoderm which develop to form the mature pituitary during early embryogenesis. Disruption of this process can result in isolated pituitary dysfunction, or effect nearby structures, such as the eye, olfactory bulbs, midline structures, and forebrain. Genetic causes make up an important portion of cases and have varying phenotypes even within identical mutations. This chapter provides an overview of pituitary development, and various causes of hypopituitarism including septo-optic dysplasia, syndromic and non-syndromic causes, isolated pituitary deficiencies, and syndromes associated with hypopituitarism. It also provides guidance on the investigation of genetic causes of hypopituitarism in the current genetic landscape. For complete coverage of all related areas of Endocrinology, please visit our on-line FREE web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

[3] The Role of Cilia in Skeletal Development and Disease
    M Schmidts (2018)
    DOI:10.1201/9781315119380-6 https://api.taylorfrancis.com/content/chapters/edit/download?identifierName=doi&identifierValue=10.1201/9781315119380-6&type=chapterpdf
    snippet: … -stage renal disease requiring dialysis and renal transplant, … for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis but is also of … with a high rate of renal and retinal disease in contrast to dynein …

[4] Expanding the clinical and molecular spectrum of TBC1D32-related ciliopathy: case reports and literature Review
    W Eiumtrakul, T Tim (2025)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s10038-025-01371-9
    snippet: … Patient 2 is a 4-year-old male who was born at term with a prenatal diagnosis of cleft lip and cleft … in the present study are shown by red colored letters (Adapted from Harris C. et al. [9]) …
    abstract: Genetic defects in primary cilia-related genes are associated with a heterogeneous group of disorders known as ciliopathies. TBC1D32-related ciliopathy presents with a broad phenotypic spectrum, ranging from isolated retinal diseases to severe multisystemic involvement, including fetal demise. We report two unrelated patients with retinal disease and hypopituitarism, with one also exhibiting facial dysmorphism, developmental delay, and unilateral oculomotor nerve palsy. Whole genome sequencing identified biallelic TBC1D32 variants in both patients, including two splice-site variants. RNA analysis revealed exon skipping, leading to frameshift and premature protein truncation. A review of previously reported cases highlighted facial dysmorphism, retinal disease, and hypopituitarism as major clinical features of TBC1D32-related ciliopathy. Additionally, we propose oculomotor nerve palsy as an extended clinical feature of this disorder. This study expands the clinical and molecular spectrum of TBC1D32-related ciliopathy.

[5] Exploring the genetic basis of early-onset chronic kidney disease
    A Vivante, F Hildebrandt (2016)
    PMID:26750453 DOI:10.1038/nrneph.2015.205 https://www.nature.com/articles/nrneph.2015.205
    snippet: … Moreover, molecular genetic diagnostics enables prenatal testing and might have prognostic … In five families we identified mutations of known renal cystic ciliopathies genes; however, in …
    abstract: The primary causes of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in children differ from those of CKD in adults. In the USA the most common diagnostic groups of renal disease that manifest before the age of 25 years are congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract, steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, chronic glomerulonephritis and renal cystic ciliopathies, which together encompass >70% of early-onset CKD diagnoses. Findings from the past decade suggest that early-onset CKD is caused by mutations in any one of over 200 different monogenic genes. Developments in high-throughput sequencing in the past few years has rendered identification of causative mutations in this high number of genes feasible. Use of genetic analyses in patients with early onset-CKD will provide patients and their families with a molecular genetic diagnosis, generate new insights into disease mechanisms, facilitate aetiology-based classifications of patient cohorts for clinical studies, and might have consequences for personalized approaches to the prevention and treatment of CKD. In this Review, we discuss the implications of next-generation sequencing in clinical genetic diagnostics and the discovery of novel genes in early-onset CKD. We also delineate the resulting opportunities for deciphering disease mechanisms and the therapeutic implications of these findings.

[6] Diagnosis of TBC1D32-associated conditions - PMC - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10204718 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10204718/
    snippet: by SC Harris · 2023 · Cited by 11 — Keywords: ciliopathy, exome sequencing, prenatal phenotype, TBC1D32 ... Renal, –, –, –, –, –, –, –, –, –, Hypo-plasia, –, –, –, –, 1/14. Adrenal ...
    abstract: Exome sequencing is a powerful tool in prenatal and postnatal genetics and can help identify novel candidate genes critical to human development. We describe seven unpublished probands with rare likely pathogenic variants or variants of uncertain significance that segregate with recessive disease in TBC1D32, including four fetal probands in three unrelated pedigrees and three pediatric probands in unrelated pedigrees. We also report clinical comparisons with seven previously published patients. Index probands were identified through an ongoing prenatal exome sequencing study and through an online data sharing platform (Gene Matcher™). A literature review was also completed. TBC1D32 is involved in the development and function of cilia and is expressed in the developing hypothalamus and pituitary gland. We provide additional data to expand the phenotype correlated with TBC1D32 variants, including a severe prenatal phenotype associated with life-limiting congenital anomalies.

[7] Confirming TBC1D32‐related ciliopathy in humans | Request PDF
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342396048_Confirming_TBC1D32-related_ciliopathy_in_humans
    snippet: Sarah Harris · Karen Chong · David ... Prenatal exome sequencing and chromosomal ... renal abnormalities. CMA detected chromosomal ...

[8] Entry - #621307 - ALSAHAN-HARRIS SYNDROME; ALHAS
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621307
    snippet: the fetal phenotype included cleft lip, ventricular septal defect, agenesis of the corpus callosum, club foot, and a sandal gap.

[9] TBC1D32
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/entities/TBC1D32
    snippet: Level 3: Skeletal dysplasias. TBC1D32 in Fetal anomalies Level 2: Fetal (including NIPD) Alsahan-Harris syndrome, Alsahan-Harris syndrome,

[10] Activity
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/activity/?panel=112&entity=TBC1D32
    snippet: : TBC1D32 were set to Alsahan-Harris syndrome, 6 fetuses from 5 unrelated families reported with a very severe fetal phenotype, characterised by brain ...