SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Differential diagnosis of lipoic acid synthesis defects
    F Tort, X Ferrer‐Cortes, A Ribes (2016)
    DOI:10.1007/s10545-016-9975-4 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1007/s10545-016-9975-4
    snippet: … phenotype showed high levels of lactate and glycine in body … phenotype that resembled those seen in NFU1 and BOLA3 … GLRX5-deficient patients presented the first symptoms later …
    abstract: Lipoic acid (LA) is an essential cofactor required for the activity of five multienzymatic complexes that play a central role in the mitochondrial energy metabolism: four 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes [pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH), 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (2-KGDH), and 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase (2-OADH)] and the glycine cleavage system (GCS). LA is synthesized in a complex multistep process that requires appropriate function of the mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis (mtFASII) and the biogenesis of iron-sulphur (Fe-S) clusters. Defects in the biosynthesis of LA have been reported to be associated with multiple and severe defects of the mitochondrial energy metabolism. In recent years, disease-causing mutations in genes encoding for proteins involved in LA metabolism have been reported: NFU1, BOLA3, IBA57, LIAS, GLRX5, LIPT1, ISCA2, and LIPT2. These studies represented important progress in understanding the pathophysiology and molecular bases underlying these disorders. Here we review current knowledge regarding involvement of LA synthesis defects in human diseases with special emphasis on the diagnostic strategies for these disorders. The clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients with LA synthesis defects are discussed and a workup for the differential diagnosis proposed.

[2] Variant non ketotic hyperglycinemia is caused by mutations in LIAS, BOLA3 and the novel gene GLRX5
    PR Baker, MW Friederich, MA Swanson, T Shaikh… (2014)
    PMID:24334290 DOI:10.1093/brain/awt328 https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/137/2/366/282721
    snippet: … in BOLA3 (MIM# 613183) and NFU1 (… , BOLA3 and GLRX5, each with a specific phenotype. This information is important for physicians evaluating patients with abnormalities in glycine …
    abstract: Patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity, but without mutations in AMT, GLDC or GCSH, the genes encoding its constituent proteins, constitute a clinical group which we call 'variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia'. We hypothesize that in some patients the aetiology involves genetic mutations that result in a deficiency of the cofactor lipoate, and sequenced genes involved in lipoate synthesis and iron-sulphur cluster biogenesis. Of 11 individuals identified with variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia, we were able to determine the genetic aetiology in eight patients and delineate the clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Mutations were identified in the genes for lipoate synthase (LIAS), BolA type 3 (BOLA3), and a novel gene glutaredoxin 5 (GLRX5). Patients with GLRX5-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia had normal development with childhood-onset spastic paraplegia, spinal lesion, and optic atrophy. Clinical features of BOLA3-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia include severe neurodegeneration after a period of normal development. Additional features include leukodystrophy, cardiomyopathy and optic atrophy. Patients with lipoate synthase-deficient variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia varied in severity from mild static encephalopathy to Leigh disease and cortical involvement. All patients had high serum and borderline elevated cerebrospinal fluid glycine and cerebrospinal fluid:plasma glycine ratio, and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity. They had low pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme activity but most did not have lactic acidosis. Patients were deficient in lipoylation of mitochondrial proteins. There were minimal and inconsistent changes in cellular iron handling, and respiratory chain activity was unaffected. Identified mutations were phylogenetically conserved, and transfection with native genes corrected the biochemical deficiency proving pathogenicity. Treatments of cells with lipoate and with mitochondrially-targeted lipoate were unsuccessful at correcting the deficiency. The recognition of variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia is important for physicians evaluating patients with abnormalities in glycine as this will affect the genetic causation and genetic counselling, and provide prognostic information on the expected phenotypic course.

[3] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis and neurological disorders
    A Selvanathan, BP Sankaran (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567724921001446
    snippet: … variants in GLRX5 are associated with two phenotypes: … bi-allelic deleterious changes in NFU1. The initial reported … MMDS2 (MIM #614299) is associated with variants in BOLA3, and …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur clusters (ISCs) are highly conserved moieties embedded into numerous crucial proteins in almost all bacteria, plants and mammals. As such, ISC biosynthesis is critical to cellular function. The pathway was first characterized in bacteria by the late 1990s, and over the subsequent 20 years there has been increasing understanding of its components in humans. Defects in the ISC pathway are now associated with many different human disease states, such as Friedreich ataxia and ISCU myopathy. Whilst the disorders have variable clinical features, most involve neurological phenotypes. There are common biochemical signatures in most of these conditions, as a lack of ISCs causes deficiencies of target proteins including Complex I, II and III, aconitase and lipoic acid. This review focuses on the disorders of ISC biogenesis that have been described in the literature to-date. Key clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological features will be discussed, providing a reference point for clinicians diagnosing and managing these patients. Therapies are mostly supportive at this stage. However, the improved understanding of the pathophysiology of these conditions could pave the way for disease-modifying therapies in the near future.

[4] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis from molecular understanding to clinical disease
    M Alfadhel, M Nashabat, QA Ali, K Hundallah (2017)
    https://nsj.org.sa/content/22/1/4.short
    snippet: … 5 (GLRX5),21 iron-sulfur cluster scaffold (NFU1)22 and bolA family member 3 (BOLA3)23,24 … decarboxylase deficiency, aminomethyltransferase gene, and glycine cleavage system H …
    abstract: Iron_sulfur clusters (ISCs) are known to play a major role in various protein functions. Located in the mitochondria, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus, they contribute to various core cellular functions. Until recently, only a few human diseases related to mitochondrial ISC biogenesis defects have been described. Such diseases include Friedreich ataxia, combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 19, infantile complex II/III deficiency defect, hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis and mitochondrial muscle myopathy, lipoic acid biosynthesis defects, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia due to glutaredoxin 5 gene defect. Disorders of mitochondrial import, export and translation, including sideroblastic anemia with ataxia, EVEN-PLUS syndrome and mitochondrial complex I deficiency due to nucleotide-binding protein-like protein gene defect, have also been implicated in ISC biogenesis defects. With advances in next generation sequencing technologies, more disorders related to ISC biogenesis defects are expected to be elucidated. In this article, we aim to shed the light on mitochondrial ISC biogenesis, related proteins and their function, pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes of related disorders, diagnostic approach, and future implications.

[5] Nonketotic hyperglycinaemia and lipoate deficiency disorders
    JLK Van Hove, R Van Coster (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/978-3-662-63123-2_23 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-662-63123-2_23
    snippet: … distinguish from non-genetic causes of elevated CSF glycine… Three individuals with GLRX5 deficiency presented in … sulfur cluster synthesis (NFU1, ISCA2, IBA57, BOLA3) a deficiency of …

[6] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC4333890 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4333890/
    snippet: by D Tonduti · 2015 · Cited by 38 — We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.

[7] 620938 - SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 93, AUTOSOMAL ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620938
    snippet: autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia-93 (SPG93) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the NFU1 gene (608100) on chromosome 2p13.

[8] Gene: NFU1 (Childhood onset hereditary spastic paraplegia)
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/568/gene/NFU1/
    snippet: They are associated with a spectrum of early-onset pure to complex hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) phenotype with a longer survival

[9] Variant non ketotic hyperglycinemia is caused by mutations ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:24334290 DOI:10.1093/brain/awt328 https://experts.arizona.edu/en/publications/variant-non-ketotic-hyperglycinemia-is-caused-by-mutations-in-lia/
    snippet: Patients with GLRX5-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia had normal development with childhood-onset spastic paraplegia, spinal lesion, and optic ...
    abstract: Patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity, but without mutations in AMT, GLDC or GCSH, the genes encoding its constituent proteins, constitute a clinical group which we call 'variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia'. We hypothesize that in some patients the aetiology involves genetic mutations that result in a deficiency of the cofactor lipoate, and sequenced genes involved in lipoate synthesis and iron-sulphur cluster biogenesis. Of 11 individuals identified with variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia, we were able to determine the genetic aetiology in eight patients and delineate the clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Mutations were identified in the genes for lipoate synthase (LIAS), BolA type 3 (BOLA3), and a novel gene glutaredoxin 5 (GLRX5). Patients with GLRX5-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia had normal development with childhood-onset spastic paraplegia, spinal lesion, and optic atrophy. Clinical features of BOLA3-associated variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia include severe neurodegeneration after a period of normal development. Additional features include leukodystrophy, cardiomyopathy and optic atrophy. Patients with lipoate synthase-deficient variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia varied in severity from mild static encephalopathy to Leigh disease and cortical involvement. All patients had high serum and borderline elevated cerebrospinal fluid glycine and cerebrospinal fluid:plasma glycine ratio, and deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity. They had low pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme activity but most did not have lactic acidosis. Patients were deficient in lipoylation of mitochondrial proteins. There were minimal and inconsistent changes in cellular iron handling, and respiratory chain activity was unaffected. Identified mutations were phylogenetically conserved, and transfection with native genes corrected the biochemical deficiency proving pathogenicity. Treatments of cells with lipoate and with mitochondrially-targeted lipoate were unsuccessful at correcting the deficiency. The recognition of variant nonketotic hyperglycinemia is important for physicians evaluating patients with abnormalities in glycine as this will affect the genetic causation and genetic counselling, and provide prognostic information on the expected phenotypic course.

[10] New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://d-nb.info/1239172095/34
    snippet: by D Tonduti · 2015 · Cited by 38 — Mutations in iron-sulfur cluster scaffold genes NFU1 and BOLA3 cause a fatal deficiency of multiple respiratory chain and 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase enzymes ...
    abstract: Recently an early onset lethal encephalopathy has been described in relation to mutations of NFU1, one of the genes involved in iron-sulfur cluster metabolism. We report a new NFU1 mutated patient presenting with a milder phenotype characterized by a later onset, a slowly progressive spastic paraparesis with relapsing-remitting episodes, mild cognitive impairment and a long survival. The early white matter abnormalities observed on MRI was combined with a mixed sensory-motor neuropathy in the third decade. Our case clearly suggests the importance of considering NFU1 mutation in slowly evolving leukoencephalopathy with high glycine concentration.