SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and … of the phenotypic data collected from the Dhx9 mutant flies, … -of-function of DHX9 leads to cardiac manifestations. It could …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[2] Superfamily II helicases: the potential therapeutic target for cardiovascular diseases
    T Fang, X Wang, N Huangfu (2023)
    DOI:10.3389/fcvm.2023.1309491/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/cardiovascular-medicine/articles/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1309491/full
    snippet: … immune response, cancer, and intellectual disability in humans. Superfamily II (… DHX9 further exacerbated the transition of VSMCs from a contractile phenotype to a synthetic phenotype…

[3] Paralog studies augment gene discovery: DDX and DHX genes
    I Paine, JE Posey, CM Grochowski… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(19)30226-5
    snippet: … developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) … ogs and human disease phenotypes, we hypothesized that … have scoliosis, and two have cardiac phenotypes (Table 1). …
    abstract: Members of a paralogous gene family in which variation in one gene is known to cause disease are eight times more likely to also be associated with human disease. Recent studies have elucidated DHX30 and DDX3X as genes for which pathogenic variant alleles are involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. We hypothesized that variants in paralogous genes encoding members of the DExD/H-box RNA helicase superfamily might also underlie developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (DD and/or ID) disease phenotypes. Here we describe 15 unrelated individuals who have DD and/or ID, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic features and were found to have probably damaging variants in DExD/H-box RNA helicase genes. In addition, these individuals exhibit a variety of other tissue and organ system involvement including ocular, outer ear, hearing, cardiac, and kidney tissues. Five individuals with homozygous (one), compound-heterozygous (two), or de novo (two) missense variants in DHX37 were identified by exome sequencing. We identified ten total individuals with missense variants in three other DDX/DHX paralogs: DHX16 (four individuals), DDX54 (three individuals), and DHX34 (three individuals). Most identified variants are rare, predicted to be damaging, and occur at conserved amino acid residues. Taken together, these 15 individuals implicate the DExD/H-box helicases in both dominantly and recessively inherited neurodevelopmental phenotypes and highlight the potential for more than one disease mechanism underlying these disorders.

[4] Bioinformatic analysis identifies potential key genes in the pathogenesis of turner syndrome
    H Wang, H Zhu, W Zhu, Y Xu, N Wang, B Han… (2020)
    DOI:10.3389/fendo.2020.00104/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/endocrinology/articles/10.3389/fendo.2020.00104/full
    snippet: … of an X chromosome in phenotypic females. The clinical signs of … TS, including congenital cardiac abnormalities, aortic dilation … , the pathogenesis of congenital heart defects in TS stills …

[5] Transcriptional co-activators: emerging roles in signaling pathways and potential therapeutic targets for diseases
    PD Talukdar, U Chatterji (2023)
    PMID:37953273 DOI:10.1038/s41392-023-01651-w https://www.nature.com/articles/s41392-023-01651-w
    snippet: … may foster tissue-specific disease phenotype. Hence, it is essential … DHx9 interacted with CBP with its N-terminal domain, while … that is often associated with intellectual disability.A rare …
    abstract: Specific cell states in metazoans are established by the symphony of gene expression programs that necessitate intricate synergic interactions between transcription factors and the co-activators. Deregulation of these regulatory molecules is associated with cell state transitions, which in turn is accountable for diverse maladies, including developmental disorders, metabolic disorders, and most significantly, cancer. A decade back most transcription factors, the key enablers of disease development, were historically viewed as 'undruggable'; however, in the intervening years, a wealth of literature validated that they can be targeted indirectly through transcriptional co-activators, their confederates in various physiological and molecular processes. These co-activators, along with transcription factors, have the ability to initiate and modulate transcription of diverse genes necessary for normal physiological functions, whereby, deregulation of such interactions may foster tissue-specific disease phenotype. Hence, it is essential to analyze how these co-activators modulate specific multilateral processes in coordination with other factors. The proposed review attempts to elaborate an in-depth account of the transcription co-activators, their involvement in transcription regulation, and context-specific contributions to pathophysiological conditions. This review also addresses an issue that has not been dealt with in a comprehensive manner and hopes to direct attention towards future research that will encompass patient-friendly therapeutic strategies, where drugs targeting co-activators will have enhanced benefits and reduced side effects. Additional insights into currently available therapeutic interventions and the associated constraints will eventually reveal multitudes of advanced therapeutic targets aiming for disease amelioration and good patient prognosis.

[6] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … is also possible that the prevalence of axonal neuropathy in DHX9-associated NDD might be higher given that axonal neuropathy was identified in the single individual who underwent …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[7] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37369308/
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Authors Mamiko Yamada 1 , cardiac conduction abnormality. heterozygosity for a ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[8] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://okayama.elsevierpure.com/en/publications/heterozygous-loss-of-function-dhx9-variants-are-associated-with-n/
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences. / Yamada, Mamiko; Nitta, ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[9] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Heterozygous-loss-of-function-DHX9-variants-are-and-Yamada-Nitta/ce5544f59e9fd5623fe162613ad02f1c3187be60
    snippet: Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences. · Mamiko Yamada, Yohei ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[10] 620988 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620988
    snippet: Affected individuals have developmental delay and most have mild to severely impaired intellectual development, often accompanied by ...