SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Compound heterozygous variants in MAPK8IP3 were detected in severe congenital hypotonia mimicking lethal spinal muscular atrophy
    J Kárteszi, A Ziegler, M Tihanyi… (2023)
    PMID:37462082 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.63340 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.63340
    snippet: … in MAPK8IP3 cause a syndromic intellectual disability of … MAPK8IP3 were first reported in 2019 by Platzer et al. in five individuals affected with a syndromic form of intellectual disability …
    abstract: Mitogen-activated protein kinase 8-interacting protein 3 gene (MAPK8IP3) encodes the c-Jun-amino-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3 (JIP3) and is involved in retrograde axonal transport. Heterozygous de novo pathogenic variants in MAPK8IP3 result in a neurodevelopmental disorder with or without brain abnormalities and possible axonal peripheral neuropathy. Whole-exome sequencing was performed on an individual presenting with severe congenital muscle hypotonia of neuronal origin mimicking lethal spinal muscular atrophy. Compound heterozygous rare variants (a splice and a missense) were detected in MAPK8IP3, inherited from the healthy parents. Western blot analysis in a muscle biopsy sample showed a more than 60% decrease in JIP3 expression. Here, we suggest a novel autosomal recessive phenotype of a lower motor neuron disease caused by JIP3 deficiency.

[2] De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual disability with variable brain anomalies
    K Platzer, H Sticht, SL Edwards, W Allen… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(18)30459-2
    snippet: … MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability… of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 …
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[3] Loss of MAPK8IP3 affects endocytosis in neurons
    AM Snead, S Gowrishankar (2022)
    DOI:10.3389/fncel.2022.828071/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/cellular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fncel.2022.828071/full
    snippet: … variants in MAPK8IP3 have recently been linked to a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability, … The study by Platzer and colleagues that identified 13 de novo variants in …

[4] Plenary Sessions
    JG Gleeson
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/6678fb930503fcddaed85fcea256dc98/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2044126
    snippet: … in MAPK8IP3 in thirteen unrelated individuals with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability … in MAPK8IP3 as a novel cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder. …

[5] A toxic gain-of-function variant in MAPK8IP3 provides insights into JIP3 cellular roles
    W Zhang, S Mittal, R Thomas, A Foroughishafiei… (2025)
    PMC12016931 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12016931/
    snippet: … interacting protein 3 (MAPK8IP3) gene encoding … , intellectual disability, ataxia, tremor, autism, seizures, and visual impairment. A patient who has a missense mutation in the MAPK8IP3 …
    abstract: Mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 interacting protein 3 (MAPK8IP3) gene encoding a protein called JIP3 is an adaption protein of the kinesin-1 complex known to play a role in axonal transport of cargo. Mutations in the gene have been linked to severe neurodevelopmental disorders, resulting in developmental delay, intellectual disability, ataxia, tremor, autism, seizures, and visual impairment. A patient who has a missense mutation in the MAPK8IP3 gene (c. 1714 C>T, Arg578Cys) (R578C) manifests dystonia, gross motor delay, and developmental delay. Here, we showed that the mutation was a toxic gain-of-function mutation that altered the interactome of JIP3; disrupted axonal transport of late endosomes; increased signaling via c-Jun N-terminal kinase, resulting in apoptosis; and disrupted dopamine receptor 1 signaling while not affecting dopamine receptor 2 signaling. Furthermore, in the presence of the mutant protein, we showed that an 80% reduction of mutant JIP3 and a 60% reduction of WT JIP3 by non-allele-selective phosphorothioate-modified antisense oligonucleotides was well tolerated by several types of cells in vitro. Our study identifies what we believe to be several important new roles for JIP3 and provides important insights for therapeutic approaches, including antisense oligonucleotide reduction of JIP3.

[6] De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30612693/
    snippet: by K Platzer · 2019 · Cited by 84 — De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual Disability with Variable Brain Anomalies ... Authors. Konrad Platzer , Heinrich Sticht ...
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[7] Article De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929718304592
    snippet: by K Platzer · 2019 · Cited by 84 — De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual Disability with Variable Brain Anomalies. Author links open overlay panelKonrad Platzer , ...

[8] De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pure.johnshopkins.edu/en/publications/de-novo-variants-in-mapk8ip3-cause-intellectual-disability-with-v/
    snippet: by K Platzer · 2019 · Cited by 83 — De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual Disability with Variable Brain Anomalies. Konrad Platzer; , Heinrich Sticht; , Stacey L.
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[9] De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual disability with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:30612693 DOI:10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.12.008 https://www.uniprot.org/citations/30612693
    snippet: De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual disability with variable brain anomalies. Platzer K., Sticht H., Edwards S.L., Allen W., Angione K.M. ...
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[10] De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause Intellectual ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/pdfExtended/S0002-9297(18)30459-2
    snippet: by K Platzer · 2019 · Cited by 83 — De Novo Variants in MAPK8IP3 Cause. Intellectual Disability with Variable Brain Anomalies. Konrad Platzer,1,* Heinrich Sticht,2 Stacey L.
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.