SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Get your molar tooth right: Joubert syndrome misdiagnosis unmasked by whole-exome sequencing
    F D'Abrusco, F Arrigoni, V Serpieri, R Romaniello… (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8
    snippet: … Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited ciliopathy, … on brain imaging as the “molar tooth sign” (MTS). Clinical signs … pathogenic variant in the GTPBP2 gene and thus received a …
    abstract: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited ciliopathy, characterized by a specific cerebellar and brainstem malformation recognizable on brain imaging as the "molar tooth sign" (MTS). Clinical signs include hypotonia, developmental delay, breathing abnormalities, and ocular motor apraxia. Older patients develop ataxia, intellectual impairment, and variable organ involvement. JS is genetically heterogeneous, with over 40 ciliary genes overall accounting for 65-75% cases. Thus, in recent years, the genetic diagnosis of JS has been based on the analysis of next-generation sequencing targeted gene panels. Since clinical features are unspecific and undistinguishable from other neurodevelopmental syndromes, the recognition of the MTS is crucial to address the patient to the appropriate genetic testing. However, the MTS is not always properly diagnosed, resulting either in false negative diagnoses (patients with the MTS not addressed to JS genetic testing) or in false positive diagnoses (patients with a different brain malformation wrongly addressed to JS genetic testing). Here, we present six cases referred for JS genetic testing based on inappropriate recognition of MTS. While the analysis of JS-related genes was negative, whole-exome sequencing (WES) disclosed pathogenic variants in other genes causative of distinct brain malformative conditions with partial clinical and neuroradiological overlap with JS. Reassessment of brain MRIs from five patients by a panel of expert pediatric neuroradiologists blinded to the genetic diagnosis excluded the MTS in all cases but one, which raised conflicting interpretations. This study highlights that the diagnostic yield of NGS-based targeted panels is strictly related to the accuracy of the diagnostic referral based on clinical and imaging assessment and that WES has an advantage over targeted panel analysis when the diagnostic suspicion is not straightforward.

[2] Neuroimaging in cerebellar ataxias: a diagnostic approach
    AT Meira, TC Vale, SCG da Costa, C Gauvreau… (2025)
    PMID:40940580 DOI:10.1007/s12311-025-01908-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12311-025-01908-w
    snippet: … type 1 or X-linked Joubert syndrome Menkes syndrome Rett … Joubert syndrome and related disorders (JSRD) are a group … and finally the pathognomonic ‘molar tooth sign’ (Fig. 4I) [28]. …
    abstract: Ataxias are a group of neurologic disorders, with heterogeneous clinical and genetic presentation and with a challenging diagnostic approach that navigates through the neuroimage field. Typical clinical features of ataxias include variable degrees of cerebellar ataxia, as a pure clinical picture or associated with other neurologic or extra neurological symptoms (cognitive impairment, epilepsy, other movement disorders, abnormal ocular movements, systemic symptoms). Neuroimaging plays an important role in the characterization of patients with ataxia. Despite the development of genetics and neuroimaging, some cases remain with no diagnosis. This review proposes a didactic investigation approach for ataxias based on three main magnetic resonance imaging features: a) ataxias without cerebellar atrophy; b) ataxias with pure cerebellar atrophy or olivopontocerebellar atrophy; and c) ataxias with specific imaging features. A comprehensive review of peer-reviewed articles on neuroimaging in diseases associated with cerebellar ataxia was conducted through a search in PubMed and SciELO. For each topic, we discuss the possible diagnosis and suggest a guided investigation. The classification of cerebellar ataxias into distinct categories-based on the presence or absence of cerebellar atrophy and specific neuroradiological features-profoundly enhances the diagnostic approach to these complex disorders.

[3] Exploring the non-coding regions of the genome: the contribution of cryptic splicing variants to the onset of Joubert syndrome
    F D'Abrusco (2023)
    https://tesidottorato.depositolegale.it/handle/20.500.14242/86057
    snippet: … Joubert syndrome is a mendelian disease that falls into the … of JS is the molar tooth sign, detectable on encephalic MRI. … genes were NLGN4X, SHANK3 and GTPBP2, causing a MTS-…

[4] Get Your Molar Tooth Right: Joubert Syndrome Misdiagnosis ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34846692 DOI:10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Get-Your-Molar-Tooth-Right%3A-Joubert-Syndrome-by-D%E2%80%99Abrusco-Arrigoni/e75eafe106f8d4321f8451a2c36162b29c1c7702
    snippet: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively ... molar tooth sign” (MTS). Clinical signs include ... This report confirms pathogenicity of biallelic GTPBP2 ...
    abstract: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited ciliopathy, characterized by a specific cerebellar and brainstem malformation recognizable on brain imaging as the "molar tooth sign" (MTS). Clinical signs include hypotonia, developmental delay, breathing abnormalities, and ocular motor apraxia. Older patients develop ataxia, intellectual impairment, and variable organ involvement. JS is genetically heterogeneous, with over 40 ciliary genes overall accounting for 65-75% cases. Thus, in recent years, the genetic diagnosis of JS has been based on the analysis of next-generation sequencing targeted gene panels. Since clinical features are unspecific and undistinguishable from other neurodevelopmental syndromes, the recognition of the MTS is crucial to address the patient to the appropriate genetic testing. However, the MTS is not always properly diagnosed, resulting either in false negative diagnoses (patients with the MTS not addressed to JS genetic testing) or in false positive diagnoses (patients with a different brain malformation wrongly addressed to JS genetic testing). Here, we present six cases referred for JS genetic testing based on inappropriate recognition of MTS. While the analysis of JS-related genes was negative, whole-exome sequencing (WES) disclosed pathogenic variants in other genes causative of distinct brain malformative conditions with partial clinical and neuroradiological overlap with JS. Reassessment of brain MRIs from five patients by a panel of expert pediatric neuroradiologists blinded to the genetic diagnosis excluded the MTS in all cases but one, which raised conflicting interpretations. This study highlights that the diagnostic yield of NGS-based targeted panels is strictly related to the accuracy of the diagnostic referral based on clinical and imaging assessment and that WES has an advantage over targeted panel analysis when the diagnostic suspicion is not straightforward.

[5] Get Your Molar Tooth Right: Joubert Syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34846692 DOI:10.1007/s12311-021-01350-8 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356655972_Get_Your_Molar_Tooth_Right_Joubert_Syndrome_Misdiagnosis_Unmasked_by_Whole-Exome_Sequencing
    snippet: Keywords Joubert syndrome · Molar tooth sign · Poretti-Boltshauser ... GTPBP2 splice site variant. Notable differences include ...
    abstract: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited ciliopathy, characterized by a specific cerebellar and brainstem malformation recognizable on brain imaging as the "molar tooth sign" (MTS). Clinical signs include hypotonia, developmental delay, breathing abnormalities, and ocular motor apraxia. Older patients develop ataxia, intellectual impairment, and variable organ involvement. JS is genetically heterogeneous, with over 40 ciliary genes overall accounting for 65-75% cases. Thus, in recent years, the genetic diagnosis of JS has been based on the analysis of next-generation sequencing targeted gene panels. Since clinical features are unspecific and undistinguishable from other neurodevelopmental syndromes, the recognition of the MTS is crucial to address the patient to the appropriate genetic testing. However, the MTS is not always properly diagnosed, resulting either in false negative diagnoses (patients with the MTS not addressed to JS genetic testing) or in false positive diagnoses (patients with a different brain malformation wrongly addressed to JS genetic testing). Here, we present six cases referred for JS genetic testing based on inappropriate recognition of MTS. While the analysis of JS-related genes was negative, whole-exome sequencing (WES) disclosed pathogenic variants in other genes causative of distinct brain malformative conditions with partial clinical and neuroradiological overlap with JS. Reassessment of brain MRIs from five patients by a panel of expert pediatric neuroradiologists blinded to the genetic diagnosis excluded the MTS in all cases but one, which raised conflicting interpretations. This study highlights that the diagnostic yield of NGS-based targeted panels is strictly related to the accuracy of the diagnostic referral based on clinical and imaging assessment and that WES has an advantage over targeted panel analysis when the diagnostic suspicion is not straightforward.

[6] Intellectual disability syndromic and non- ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/250/
    snippet: molar tooth sign; polydactyly; Joubert syndrome. Tags. Green Green List (high ... GTPBP2. 1 review. 1 green, BIALLELIC, autosomal or pseudoautosomal. Sources.

[7] Jaberi-Elahi syndrome: Exploring a novel GTPBP2 mutation and a literature review
    J Manoochehri, A Shiri, S Khoddam… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721224000454
    snippet: … disease-causing variants of the GTPBP2 gene have been identified that can lead to Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. … variant in the GTPBP2 gene that can be related to Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. …
    abstract: Jaberi-Elahi syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disease caused by pathogenic variants in GTPBP2. The core symptoms of this disease are intellectual disability, motor development delay, abnormal reflexes, skeletal abnormalities, and visual impairment. In this study, we describe a three-year-old girl with a novel homozygous variant in GTPBP2 and a phenotype overlapping with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. This variant (NM_019096.5:c.1289T > C, p.Leu430Pro) was identified by Whole Exome Sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing although remains classified as VUS based on ACMG criteria. The proband demonstrated motor and intellectual developmental delay, muscle weakness, language disorder, facial dysmorphism, and poor growth. Hitherto, twenty-seven individuals with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome have been reported in the literature. This study, describes a review of the symptoms related to the Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. A large numbers of patients manifest motor development delay (26/28), sparse hair (26/28), and speech disorder (24/28). Moreover, a significant fraction of patients suffer from intellectual disability (23/28), hypotonia (23/28), skeletal problems (23/28), and visual impairment (18/28). In spite of previous patients, the proband in this study did not exhibit any skeletal abnormalities. In summary, we present evidence implicating a novel missense variant in Jaberi-Elahi syndrome, expanding and refining the genetic spectrum of this condition.

[8] A Novel Homozygous Frameshift GTPBP2 Variant in Jaberi-Elahi Syndrome: First Case Report from Türkiye
    M Soğukpınar, Y Ataş, G Üner, P Arslan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1159/000552675/949444 https://karger.com/msy/article-abstract/doi/10.1159/000552675/949444
    snippet: … · New information 3; This study defines Jaberi-Elahi syndrome … Conclusion: Jaberi-Elahi syndrome should be considered in … molecular and clinical spectrum of Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. …

[9] Entry - #617988 - JABERI-ELAHI SYNDROME; JABELS
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/617988
    snippet: Jaberi-Elahi syndrome (JABELS) is an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by developmental delay and impaired intellectual ...

[10] GTPBP2 | Jaberi-Elahi syndrome | Autosomal recessive by ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://thegencc.org/submissions/SGC-107075.2
    snippet: This disorder is characterized by developmental, neurological (epilepsy, contractures and/or hypotonia), craniofacial (microcephaly and/or facial dysmorphism), ...