SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN … SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[2] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … (C) Muscle MRI from the proband showed involvement of triceps brachii (arrow in thorax), paraspinal muscles (arrow in abdomen), distal portions of vasti (asterisk in thighs), sartorius (…
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[3] Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) existing registries and natural history studies: Where do we stand?
    E Faedo, I Tahiri, C Alimi, H Shoaito… (2026)
    DOI:10.1177/22143602251355316 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/22143602251355316
    snippet: … There is a critical need for standardized and validated imaging biomarkers, such as muscle MRI … Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like …
    abstract: <h4>Introduction</h4>Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs) are heterogeneous inherited disorders with no cure, including 29 recessive (LGMDR) and 5 dominant forms (LGMDD), characterized by proximal muscle weakness. Finding a cure for LGMD is difficult due to the their slow evolution for which comprehensive data collection through registries, network, and natural history studies is pivotal.<h4>Methods</h4>We conducted a review following PRISMA guidelines searching in PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science for articles published between 2000-2025, focusing on LGMD registries, networks, and natural history studies. We included observational studies, cohort designs, and registry-based studies.<h4>Results</h4>Among 443 records, 38 studies were included, 10 registries, 4 networks, and 17 natural history studies respectively. Registries varied in scope, with many focused on specific LGMD subtypes. Natural history studies were predominantly subtype-specific, poorly linked to registries. Only 12 studies were connected to registries or networks, and most performed in Europe and North America.<h4>Discussion</h4>Registries, networks, and natural history studies showed considerable design variability, leading to challenges with data interoperability and underscoring the need for standardization. Despite regional coverage, low-income countries are underrepresented in the data. The limited linkage between natural history studies and registries presents a missed opportunity to leverage well-characterized cohorts. Many registries and networks remain unpublished, limiting available data for global research.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Registries are crucial, benefiting patients, clinicians, researchers, and industries. The scarcity of natural history studies hinders the development of centralized datasets. Standardizing registry design, improving data interoperability, and enhancing patient diversity are critical to boost LGMD research.

[4] Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies
    T Liewluck (2025)
    DOI:10.1212/cont.0000000000001615 https://continuum.aan.com/doi/abs/10.1212/cont.0000000000001615
    snippet: … This latter feature distinguishes LGMD from congenital muscular dystrophy.This updated … Initially, muscle MRI was explored as a potential biomarker to assess the progression of …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>This article reviews the current classification system, common subtypes, differential diagnosis, diagnostic algorithms, current management strategies, and evolving therapeutic areas for limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs).<h4>Latest developments</h4>There are currently five dominantly inherited LGMDs (LGMD-D1 to D5) and 29 recessively inherited LGMDs (LGMD-R1 to R29). Progress in molecular genetics makes next-generation sequencing gene panels the initial step in diagnosing LGMD and, in some cases, obviates the need for muscle biopsy. The panel should include LGMD genes and genes responsible for other hereditary myopathies and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing can be performed before or after a muscle biopsy, depending on the specifics of each case. Once a diagnosis of LGMD is established, genetic counseling, symptomatic and supportive care, and cardiopulmonary surveillance remain the cornerstones of management. However, results from preclinical studies and early-stage clinical trials of genetic therapies for common LGMD-R subtypes are promising.<h4>Essential points</h4>Progressive proximal weakness and hyperCKemia are hallmark features of LGMDs; however, they are not specific and can also be observed in many acquired and hereditary myopathies. Muscle biopsy is typically reserved for patients with negative or inconclusive genetic testing and can be particularly useful for verifying the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance. Advances in molecular genetics and genetic therapies have revolutionized the diagnostic landscape of LGMDs and paved the way for future disease-specific treatments.

[5] Expert consensus on genetic diagnostic approaches for patients with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy
    V Straub, AR Clause, S Donkervoort, PB Kang… (2025)
    DOI:10.1212/WNL.0000000000214291 https://www.neurology.org/doi/abs/10.1212/WNL.0000000000214291
    snippet: … Likewise, additional testing to support pathogenicity may be required (eg, variant phasing, muscle MRI, muscle biopsy with immunohistochemical staining or Western blot analysis for …
    abstract: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is the phenotypic description of a clinically and genetically diverse group of inherited neuromuscular disorders involving proximal muscles of the pelvic and shoulder girdles. There are currently over 30 different genetic forms of LGMD, and despite diagnostic advances, accurate diagnoses may be difficult to achieve. Although clinical diagnosis of a patient with a specific form of LGMD is possible in some cases, a precise and timely genetic diagnosis can be crucial to anticipate and prevent complications associated with particular genetic forms of LGMD (e.g., extramuscular manifestations such as cardiac, respiratory, or cognitive impairments). With the rapid pace of genetic testing advances, updates on training and education are imperative to support the correct use of these tests. We formed an expert consensus to provide an efficient diagnostic approach meant to empower clinicians in the use of genetic and other supportive tests. Informed selection and interpretation of a gene panel; use of genome or exome sequencing; and use of biochemical, imaging, pathology, and electromyography tests are discussed here. Ultimately, genetic testing should help to confirm a diagnosis and guide treatment decisions or counseling services.

[6] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38366623/
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — ... muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. ... muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[7] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — Our findings indicate that deleterious variants in SNUPN gene are the cause of a novel form of muscular dystrophy characterized by alterations in snRNP ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[8] SNUPN-Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41054283/
    snippet: SNUPN-Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights ... Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral ...
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[9] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://deustoteka.deusto.es/items/eb9641d8-d6fb-49e7-8653-a06cd7249491/full
    snippet: ... muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient ... Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features.
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[10] Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies
    SDMDPD Limb
    PMID:41037170 DOI:10.1212/cont.0000000000001615 https://www.medlink.com/articles/limb-girdle-muscular-dystrophies
    snippet: … Muscle pathology demonstrates cytoplasmic inclusions and rimmed vacuoles. In muscle MRI, the radiological features of … The characteristic pattern is muscular atrophy of pelvic girdle …
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>This article reviews the current classification system, common subtypes, differential diagnosis, diagnostic algorithms, current management strategies, and evolving therapeutic areas for limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs).<h4>Latest developments</h4>There are currently five dominantly inherited LGMDs (LGMD-D1 to D5) and 29 recessively inherited LGMDs (LGMD-R1 to R29). Progress in molecular genetics makes next-generation sequencing gene panels the initial step in diagnosing LGMD and, in some cases, obviates the need for muscle biopsy. The panel should include LGMD genes and genes responsible for other hereditary myopathies and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing can be performed before or after a muscle biopsy, depending on the specifics of each case. Once a diagnosis of LGMD is established, genetic counseling, symptomatic and supportive care, and cardiopulmonary surveillance remain the cornerstones of management. However, results from preclinical studies and early-stage clinical trials of genetic therapies for common LGMD-R subtypes are promising.<h4>Essential points</h4>Progressive proximal weakness and hyperCKemia are hallmark features of LGMDs; however, they are not specific and can also be observed in many acquired and hereditary myopathies. Muscle biopsy is typically reserved for patients with negative or inconclusive genetic testing and can be particularly useful for verifying the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance. Advances in molecular genetics and genetic therapies have revolutionized the diagnostic landscape of LGMDs and paved the way for future disease-specific treatments.