SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy… indicated that the DHX9 G414R and DHX9 R1052Q were functionally …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[2] Translational Control in Cardiac Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Development: When mRNA Meets the Heart
    UK Baliga, L Yang, A Ivanov, JL Schwartz… (2025)
    PMID:40869184 DOI:10.3390/ijms26167863 https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/26/16/7863
    snippet: … reported to cause spontaneous early onset dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. These cardiomyopathy-related mitochondrial translation machinery mutations include mitochondrial …
    abstract: Cardiac physiology and pathology have been extensively explored at the transcriptional level. Still, they are less understood at the translational level, including three major knowledge gaps: pathophysiological impact, molecular mechanisms, and therapeutic implications of translational control in cardiac biology and heart disease. This review aims to provide a summary of the most recent key findings in this emerging field of translational control in heart health and disease, covering the physiological functions, disease pathogenesis, biochemical mechanisms, and development of potential RNA-based, translation-manipulating drugs. Translation of mRNA to protein is the final step in the central dogma for protein synthesis. Translation machinery includes a family of essential "housekeeping" factors and enzymes required for mRNA translation. These translation factors ensure the accurate processing of mRNA to protein according to the genetic code and maintain the optimal quality and quantity of cellular proteins for normal cardiac function. Translation factors also regulate the efficiency, speed, and fidelity of protein production and play a role in cardiac pathological remodeling under stress conditions. This review first introduces the techniques and methods used to study the translational regulation of gene expression in the cardiac system. We then summarize discoveries of a variety of pathophysiological functions and molecular mechanisms of translational control in cardiac health and disease, focusing on two primary symptoms, cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. In these sessions, we discuss the translational regulation directed by specific regulatory factors in cardiac physiology and how their genetic mutations, expression dysregulation, or functional alterations contribute to the etiology of heart disease. Notably, translational control exhibits extensive crosstalk with other processes, including transcriptional regulation, mitochondrial metabolism, and sarcomere homeostasis. Furthermore, recent findings have revealed the role of translational regulation in cardiomyocyte proliferation and heart regeneration, providing new approaches for creating regenerative medicine. Because transcript-specific translational regulation of both pathological and protective proteins occurs in heart disease, target-selective translation inhibitors and enhancers can be developed. These inhibitors and enhancers offer valuable insights into novel therapeutic targets and the developm

[3] p53-regulated lncRNAs in cancers: from proliferation and metastasis to therapy
    K Yang, Y Xiao, L Zhong, W Zhang, P Wang… (2023)
    PMID:37679529 DOI:10.1038/s41417-023-00662-7 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41417-023-00662-7
    snippet: … (6) RNA binding protein: lncRNA KIMAT1 interacts with protein DHX9 to further modulate the KRAS pathway and microRNA biogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer (Fig. 1F) [42]. (7) …
    abstract: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified as master gene regulators through various mechanisms such as transcription, translation, protein modification and RNA-protein complexes. LncRNA dysregulation is frequently associated with a variety of biological functions and human diseases including cancer. The p53 network is a key tumor-suppressive mechanism that transcriptionally activates target genes to suppress cellular proliferation in human malignancies. Recent research indicates that lncRNAs play an important role in the p53 signaling pathway. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of lncRNAs in p53-relevant functions and provide an overview of how these altered lncRNAs contribute to tumor initiation and progression. We also discuss the association between lncRNA and up- or downstream genes of p53. These findings imply that lncRNAs can help identify cellular vulnerabilities that may prove to be promising potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for cancer treatment.

[4] Drosophila model to clarify the pathological significance of OPA1 in autosomal dominant optic atrophy
    Y Nitta, J Osaka, R Maki, S Hakeda (2024)
    https://elifesciences.org/articles/87880
    snippet: … et al., 2023). Moreover, we identified heterozygous LOF mutations in DHX9 as potentially … G414R and R1052Q variants of DHX9 (Yamada et al., 2023). This experimental framework …
    abstract: Autosomal dominant optic atrophy (DOA) is a progressive form of blindness caused by degeneration of retinal ganglion cells and their axons, mainly caused by mutations in the OPA1 mitochondrial dynamin <i>like</i> GTPase (<i>OPA1</i>) gene. <i>OPA1</i> encodes a dynamin-like GTPase present in the mitochondrial inner membrane. When associated with OPA1 mutations, DOA can present not only ocular symptoms but also multi-organ symptoms (DOA plus). DOA plus often results from point mutations in the GTPase domain, which are assumed to have dominant-negative effects. However, the presence of mutations in the GTPase domain does not always result in DOA plus. Therefore, an experimental system to distinguish between DOA and DOA plus is needed. In this study, we found that loss-of-function mutations of the <i>dOPA1</i> gene in <i>Drosophila</i> can imitate the pathology of optic nerve degeneration observed in DOA. We successfully rescued this degeneration by expressing the human <i>OPA1</i> (<i>hOPA1</i>) gene, indicating that <i>hOPA1</i> is functionally interchangeable with <i>dOPA1</i> in the fly system. However, mutations previously identified did not ameliorate the <i>dOPA1</i> deficiency phenotype. By expressing both WT and DOA plus mutant <i>hOPA1</i> forms in the optic nerve of <i>dOPA1</i> mutants, we observed that DOA plus mutations suppressed the rescue, facilitating the distinction between loss-of-function and dominant-negative mutations in <i>hOPA1</i>. This fly model aids in distinguishing DOA from DOA plus and guides initial <i>hOPA1</i> mutation treatment strategies.

[5] An autoantigen-ome from HS-Sultan B-Lymphoblasts offers a molecular map for investigating autoimmune sequelae of COVID-19
    JY Wang, W Zhang, VB Roehrl, MW Roehrl… (2023)
    DOI:10.1101/2021.04.05.438500 https://connectsci.au/ch/article-abstract/76/8/525/85519
    snippet: To understand how COVID-19 may induce autoimmune diseases, we have been compiling an atlas of COVID autoantigens (autoAgs). Using dermatan sulfate (DS) affinity enrichment of …
    abstract: To understand how COVID-19 may induce autoimmune diseases, we have been compiling an atlas of COVID-autoantigens (autoAgs). Using dermatan sulfate (DS) affinity enrichment of autoantigenic proteins extracted from HS-Sultan lymphoblasts, we identified 362 DS-affinity proteins, of which at least 201 (56%) are confirmed autoAgs. Comparison with available multi-omic COVID data shows that 315 (87%) of the 362 proteins are affected in SARS-CoV-2 infection via altered expression, interaction with viral components, or modification by phosphorylation or ubiquitination, at least 186 (59%) of which are known autoAgs. These proteins are associated with gene expression, mRNA processing, mRNA splicing, translation, protein folding, vesicles, and chromosome organization. Numerous nuclear autoAgs were identified, including both classical ANAs and ENAs of systemic autoimmune diseases and unique autoAgs involved in the DNA replication fork, mitotic cell cycle, or telomerase maintenance. We also identified many uncommon autoAgs involved in nucleic acid and peptide biosynthesis and nucleocytoplasmic transport, such as aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. In addition, this study found autoAgs that potentially interact with multiple SARS-CoV-2 Nsp and Orf components, including CCT/TriC chaperonin, insulin degrading enzyme, platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase, and the ezrin-moesin-radixin family. Furthermore, B-cell-specific IgM-associated ER complex (including MBZ1, BiP, heat shock proteins, and protein disulfide-isomerases) is enriched by DS-affinity and up-regulated in B-cells of COVID-19 patients, and a similar IgH-associated ER complex was also identified in autoreactive pre-B1 cells in our previous study, which suggests a role of autoreactive B1 cells in COVID-19 that merits further investigation. In summary, this study demonstrates that virally infected cells are characterized by alterations of proteins with propensity to become autoAgs, thereby providing a possible explanation for infection-induced autoimmunity. The COVID autoantigen-ome provides a valuable molecular resource and map for investigation of COVID-related autoimmune sequelae and considerations for vaccine design.

[6] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — (Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[7] Gene: DHX9 -
    (authors not shown)
    https://gene.sfari.org/database/human-gene/DHX9
    snippet: Yamada et al., 2023 demonstrated that two de novo ... cardiomyopathy ... Calame et al., 2023 described 20 individuals with rare monoallelic DHX9 ...

[8] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37369308/
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — (Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[9] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://okayama.elsevierpure.com/en/publications/heterozygous-loss-of-function-dhx9-variants-are-associated-with-n/
    snippet: by M Yamada · 2023 · Cited by 12 — (Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. ... Yamada, M., Nitta, Y ...
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[10] AutDB - Autism Database - Search
    (authors not shown)
    http://autism.mindspec.org/GeneDetail/DHX9?species=Mus+musculus
    snippet: Yamada et al., 2023 demonstrated that two de novo ... cardiomyopathy ... Calame et al., 2023 described 20 individuals with rare monoallelic DHX9 ...