SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Cornelia de Lange spectrum
    Á Ascaso, M Arnedo, B Puisac… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2341287924001388
    snippet: … of additional genes (BRD4, ANKRD11, MAU2), but the lack of molecular … Growth delay is not as significant, with a lower frequency of postnatal growth retardation and microcephaly…
    abstract: The cohesin complex plays crucial roles in DNA repair, chromatid separation, and gene transcription regulation. Pathogenic variants in cohesins or dysfunctional transcriptional regulators lead to cohesinopathies, a broader group of disorders including Cornelia de Lange Spectrum (CdLSp), for which the prevalence of cancer cases remains unclear. Here, we aimed to assess the prevalence of oncological events in CdLSp and elucidate the role of cohesin variants in cancer predisposition. We developed a custom next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel targeting predisposition and pathogenic genes, which we applied on N = 120 samples of pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), identifying 11 out of 229 total-10 germline and 1 somatic-variants in cohesin genes. Data of N = 205 brain tumors were extracted by bioinformatic analysis of data from open-source databases carrying 19 somatic variants. In a cohort of 54 CdLSp patients, the largest cohort from a single center, with a median age of 13 years, the hypothesis of an increased prevalence of cancer in CdLSp was not confirmed. Our findings highlight a significant involvement of germline NIPBL variants in CdLSp, whereas RAD21 and STAG1/2 are predominantly found as somatic variants in neoplasms. However, a distinct genetic or molecular pattern distinguishing variants leading to CdLSp from tumors was not identified. Hence, we advocate for further investigation into the relationship between cohesin variants and cancer predisposition in a larger cohort of patients, with a longer observation time and including different types of malignancies, with more focus on epigenetic approaches.

[2] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: … stature and microcephaly. Based on these observations, we propose that MAU2 should be … Six individuals with short stature received growth hormone (GH) treatment. GH deficiency …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[3] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 lead to a new Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2025)
    PMC12668068 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12668068/
    snippet: … short stature and microcephaly. Based on these observations, we propose that MAU2 should be … haploinsufficiency disrupts mammalian growth and brain development. The discrepancy …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While  NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of  MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous  MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. MAU2 in-frame variants predominantly impair NIPBL–MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause  MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most patients exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also identified two  MAU2 -specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features. A heterozygous  Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulated these traits, confirming the causal role of  MAU2 disruption  in vivo. Our study establishes  MAU2 as a new CdLS-associated gene and delineates a  MAU2 -related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[4] Microdeletions at 19p13. 11p12 in five individuals with neurodevelopmental delay
    M Rieger, S Moutton, S Verheyen, K Steindl… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721222002506
    snippet: … in MAU2 was considered pathogenic in an individual with Cornelia de Lange syndrome. … accordance to this syndrome: While he had no growth failure or distinct limb anomaly, his small …

[5] Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction
    D Braunholz, M Hullings, MC Gil (2012)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/ejhg2011175
    snippet: … –MAU2 function in CdLS, we first confirmed the interaction of NIPBL with MAU2 using yeast two-hybrid selective growth … has been associated with mental retardation and microcephaly.…
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; or Brachmann-de Lange syndrome) is a dominantly inherited congenital malformation disorder with features that include characteristic facies, cognitive delays, growth retardation and limb anomalies. Mutations in nearly 60% of CdLS patients have been identified in NIPBL, which encodes a regulator of the sister chromatid cohesion complex. NIPBL, also known as delangin, is a homolog of yeast and amphibian Scc2 and C. elegans PQN-85. Although the exact mechanism of NIPBL function in sister chromatid cohesion is unclear, in vivo yeast and C. elegans experiments and in vitro vertebrate cell experiments have demonstrated that NIPBL/Scc2 functionally interacts with the MAU2/Scc4 protein to initiate loading of cohesin onto chromatin. To test the significance of this model in the clinical setting of CdLS, we fine-mapped the NIBPL-MAU2 interaction domain and tested the functional significance of missense mutations and variants in NIPBL and MAU2 identified in these minimal domains in a cohort of patients with CdLS. We demonstrate that specific novel mutations at the N-terminus of the MAU2-interacting domain of NIBPL result in markedly reduced MAU2 binding, although we appreciate no consistent clinical difference in the small group of patients with these mutations. These data suggest that factors in addition to MAU2 are essential in determining the clinical features and severity of CdLS.

[6] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8223&context=papers
    snippet: Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity. Cornelia de Lange ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[7] Clinical study and genetic analysis of Cornelia de Lange ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10767608 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10767608/
    snippet: by Y Peng · 2023 · Cited by 6 — Clinical study and genetic analysis of Cornelia de Lange syndrome caused by a novel MAU2 gene variant in a Chinese boy · 2. MATERIALS AND METHODS.
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is mainly characterized by specific facial features, growth retardation, and bone deformities. Seven genes reportedly cause CdLS. Recent research has reported that loss-of-function variants affecting MAU2, which encodes a regulator of the cohesin complex, can cause CdLS. Thus far, only one MAU2-CdLS case has been reported worldwide.<h4>Methods</h4>We detected a novel variant in MAU2 gene, NM_015329, c.526C>T (p.Arg176Trp) in a Chinese patient with CdLS, constructed a plasmid for in vitro transcriptional and protein level analysis, and analyzed the interaction between the MAU2/NIPBL complex using molecular dynamics (MD).<h4>Results</h4>The results showed that the level of the exogenous MAU2 mutant protein was significantly reduced compared with that of the exogenous wild-type protein. However, MD analysis predicted an increased binding free energy between the MAU2 and NIPBL proteins that may impact the structural stability of the complex.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We investigated a MAU2-CdLS case in a Chinese family, which strengthens the association between MAU2 variants and CdLS phenotypes. We therefore propose that MAU2 be included in the CdLS gene screening list.

[8] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome (CDL)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/cornelia_de_lange_syndrome
    snippet: Cornelia de Lange syndrome is characterized by slow growth ... Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange ...

[9] 621570 - CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 7; CDLS7
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/621570
    snippet: Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange syndrome subtype. Nature Commun. 17: 3036, 2026. [PubMed ...

[10] Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    MI Boyle, C Jespersgaard, K Brøndum‐Nielsen… (2015)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.12499 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.12499
    snippet: … -like protein) and MAU2 (MAU2 sister chromatid cohesion factor)]… growth retardation, asymmetrical oligodactyly, microcephaly, … in the first trimester and growth failure typically presents …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; MIM #122470, 300590, 610759, 614701, 300882) is a rare and clinically variable disorder that affects multiple organs. It is characterized by intellectual disability (mild to severe), distinctive facial features, prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, and hirsutism. Congenital anomalies include malformations of the upper limbs, gastrointestinal malformation/rotation, pyloric stenosis, diaphragmatic hernia, heart defects and genitourinary malformations. Gastroesophageal reflux disease is present in almost all patients. In addition to classic forms, milder phenotypes have been reported. To date five genes [NIPBL (Nipped-B-like protein), SMC1A (structural maintenance of chromosomes 1A), SMC3 (structural maintenance of chromosomes 3), RAD21 (human homolog of Schizosaccharomyces pombe radiation sensitive mutant 21) and HDAC8 (histone deacetylase 8)] have been associated with CdLS and mutations of these genes comprise the underlying defect in 70% of the patients. Here, we will provide a brief review of the clinical features of CdLS, summarize the known underlying genetic defects, prenatal and postnatal diagnosis possibilities, and genetic counseling.