SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 in Ashkenazi Jews
    R Birnbaum, S Ezer, NS Lotan, A Eilat… (2024)
    https://jmg.bmj.com/content/61/3/289.abstract
    snippet: … In this paper, we highlight SGSM3 as a candidate disease gene for autosomal recessive mild to moderate intellectual disability. We identified a founder variant in Ashkenazi Jews, with a …

[2] A Strong Candidate Gene for Nonsyndromic Intellectual Disability Phenotype: SGSM3
    A Turkyilmaz, KA Saglam, M Yilmaz… (2025)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.14631 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.14631
    snippet: … Birnbaum et al. that the SGSM3 gene might be associated with a Mendelian inherited disease in families of Ashkenazi … might be the founder variant for the Ashkenazi Jewish population […
    abstract: SGSM proteins are small modulator proteins interacting with proteins in the RAS signaling pathway. Studies with mouse and human tissues indicated that SGSM genes were highly expressed in the brain and could be expressed at different levels at different stages of development in fetal and adult brain tissue. It was first reported by Birnbaum et al. that the SGSM3 gene might be associated with a Mendelian inherited disease in families of Ashkenazi Jews with clinical manifestations of intellectual disability (ID). In this study, a novel homozygous stop-gain (NM_015705.6: c.1576C>T: p.(Arg526Ter)) variation was detected in the SGSM3 gene in two siblings with short stature and ID findings. The report of two cases with bi-allelic LOF variants in the SGSM3 gene from different populations with similar clinical manifestations strengthens the potential of this gene as a candidate gene for the nonsyndromic ID phenotype. Functional studies are required to investigate the signaling pathways affected by SGSM3 gene variations to produce the ID phenotype and their effect on the functioning of neurons.

[3] Autism spectrum disorder trios from consanguineous populations are enriched for rare homozygous variants, identifying 32 new candidate genes
    R Harripaul, A Rabia, N Vasli, A Mikhailov… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-026-44288-9
    snippet: … candidate AR genes, SGSM3 and VPS16, have recently been confirmed in multiple NDD … MA is co-founder and director of Institute of Omics and Health Research, Lahore, a research …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) that affects about 1 in 54 children worldwide, imposing enormous economic and socioemotional burden on families and communities. Genetic studies of ASD have identified de novo copy number variants (CNVs) and point mutations that contribute significantly to the genetic architecture, but the majority of these studies were conducted in populations unsuited for detecting autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance. However, several ASD studies in consanguineous populations point towards AR as an under-appreciated source of ASD variants. We used whole exome sequencing to look for rare variants for ASD in 115 proband-mother-father trios from populations with high rates of consanguinity, namely Pakistan, Iran, and Saudi Arabia. Consanguinity was assessed through microarray genotyping. We report 77 candidate single nucleotide variants and indels, with 62% homozygous, 22% autosomal dominant/de novo, and 16% X-linked, in 55 trios. 56% of the variants were loss of function (LoF) or putative LoF (pLoF), and 44% nonsynonymous. We found an enrichment of homozygous variants, both in 16 genes previously reported for AR ASD and/or intellectual disability (ID) and 32 previously unreported AR candidate genes (including DAGLA, ENPP6, FAXDC2, ILDR2, KSR2, PKD1L1, SCN10A, SHH, and SLC36A1). We also identified seven candidate homozygous exonic loss CNVs. The significant enrichment for homozygous variants among individuals with high Froh coefficients, compared with low Froh, either in known or candidate AR genes, confirms that genetic architecture for ASD among consanguineous populations is different to non-consanguineous populations. Assessment of consanguinity may assist in the genetic diagnostic process for ASD.

[4] Identifikace změn proteomu ve zvětšených neuronálních časných endozomech u Alzheimerovy choroby
    M Mećava (2026)
    https://is.muni.cz/th/e98gj
    snippet: Anotace Alzheimerova choroba (AD) je nejčastější příčinou demence u starších osob, charak-terizovaná ukládáním neurotoxických plaků amyloidu-beta (Aβ), hyperfosforylací proteinu …

[5] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37833060/
    snippet: by R Birnbaum · 2024 · Cited by 3 — Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 in Ashkenazi Jews ... Rivka Birnbaum , Shlomit ...
    abstract: Patients with Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (SKDEAS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with a spectrum of developmental and intellectual delays and disabilities, harbor diverse mutations in WDR26, encoding a subunit of the multiprotein CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Structural studies revealed that homodimers of WDR26 bridge two core-CTLH E3 complexes to generate giant, hollow oval-shaped supramolecular CTLH E3 assemblies. Additionally, WDR26 mediates CTLH E3 complex binding to subunit YPEL5 and functions as substrate receptor for the transcriptional repressor HBP1. Here, we mapped SKDEAS-associated mutations on a WDR26 structural model and tested their functionality in complementation studies using genetically engineered human cells lacking CTLH E3 supramolecular assemblies. Despite the diversity of mutations, 15 of 16 tested mutants impaired at least one CTLH E3 complex function contributing to complex assembly and interactions, thus providing first mechanistic insights into SKDEAS pathology.

[6] Birnbaum-et-al-2023-SGSM3.pdf
    (authors not shown)
    https://doryeshorim.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Birnbaum-et-al-2023-SGSM3.pdf
    snippet: Conclusions An Ashkenazi Jewish homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 was discovered in individuals with NDDs and short stature. This finding establishes a.

[7] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://cris.tau.ac.il/en/publications/intellectual-disability-syndrome-associated-with-a-homozygous-fou/
    snippet: Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 in Ashkenazi Jews. Rivka Birnbaum; , Shlomit Ezer; , ...
    abstract: Patients with Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (SKDEAS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with a spectrum of developmental and intellectual delays and disabilities, harbor diverse mutations in WDR26, encoding a subunit of the multiprotein CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Structural studies revealed that homodimers of WDR26 bridge two core-CTLH E3 complexes to generate giant, hollow oval-shaped supramolecular CTLH E3 assemblies. Additionally, WDR26 mediates CTLH E3 complex binding to subunit YPEL5 and functions as substrate receptor for the transcriptional repressor HBP1. Here, we mapped SKDEAS-associated mutations on a WDR26 structural model and tested their functionality in complementation studies using genetically engineered human cells lacking CTLH E3 supramolecular assemblies. Despite the diversity of mutations, 15 of 16 tested mutants impaired at least one CTLH E3 complex function contributing to complex assembly and interactions, thus providing first mechanistic insights into SKDEAS pathology.

[8] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/374707074_Intellectual_disability_syndrome_associated_with_a_homozygous_founder_variant_in_SGSM3_in_Ashkenazi_Jews
    snippet: Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 in Ashkenazi Jews ... It was first reported by Birnbaum et al. that ...
    abstract: Patients with Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (SKDEAS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with a spectrum of developmental and intellectual delays and disabilities, harbor diverse mutations in WDR26, encoding a subunit of the multiprotein CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Structural studies revealed that homodimers of WDR26 bridge two core-CTLH E3 complexes to generate giant, hollow oval-shaped supramolecular CTLH E3 assemblies. Additionally, WDR26 mediates CTLH E3 complex binding to subunit YPEL5 and functions as substrate receptor for the transcriptional repressor HBP1. Here, we mapped SKDEAS-associated mutations on a WDR26 structural model and tested their functionality in complementation studies using genetically engineered human cells lacking CTLH E3 supramolecular assemblies. Despite the diversity of mutations, 15 of 16 tested mutants impaired at least one CTLH E3 complex function contributing to complex assembly and interactions, thus providing first mechanistic insights into SKDEAS pathology.

[9] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scispace.com/papers/intellectual-disability-syndrome-associated-with-a-2c9j2w16gg
    snippet: Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a homozygous founder variant in SGSM3 in Ashkenazi Jews. Rivka Birnbaum,Shlomit Ezer,Nava Shaul-Lotan,Avital ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) impact both the development and functioning of the brain and exhibit clinical and genetic variability. RAP and RAB proteins, belonging to the RAS superfamily, are identified as established contributors to NDDs. However, the involvement of SGSM (small G protein signalling modulator), another member of the RAS family, in NDDs has not been previously documented.<h4>Methods</h4>Proband-only or trio exome sequencing was performed on DNA samples obtained from affected individuals and available family members. The variant prioritisation process focused on identifying rare deleterious variants. International collaboration aided in the identification of additional affected individuals.<h4>Results</h4>We identified 13 patients from 8 families of Ashkenazi Jewish origin who all carried the same homozygous frameshift variant in <i>SGSM3</i> gene. The variant was predicted to cause a loss of function, potentially leading to impaired protein structure or function. The variant co-segregated with the disease in all available family members. The affected individuals displayed mild global developmental delay and mild to moderate intellectual disability. Additional prevalent phenotypes observed included hypotonia, behavioural challenges and short stature.<h4>Conclusions</h4>An Ashkenazi Jewish homozygous founder variant in <i>SGSM3</i> was discovered in individuals with NDDs and short stature. This finding establishes a connection between another member of the RAS family and NDDs. Additional research is needed to uncover the specific molecular mechanisms by which SGSM3 influences neurodevelopmental processes and the regulation of growth.

[10] Intellectual disability syndrome associated with a ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://cris.biu.ac.il/en/publications/intellectual-disability-syndrome-associated-with-a-homozygous-fou/
    snippet: Results We identified 13 patients from 8 families of Ashkenazi Jewish origin who all carried the same homozygous frameshift variant in SGSM3 ...
    abstract: Patients with Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (SKDEAS), a neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with a spectrum of developmental and intellectual delays and disabilities, harbor diverse mutations in WDR26, encoding a subunit of the multiprotein CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Structural studies revealed that homodimers of WDR26 bridge two core-CTLH E3 complexes to generate giant, hollow oval-shaped supramolecular CTLH E3 assemblies. Additionally, WDR26 mediates CTLH E3 complex binding to subunit YPEL5 and functions as substrate receptor for the transcriptional repressor HBP1. Here, we mapped SKDEAS-associated mutations on a WDR26 structural model and tested their functionality in complementation studies using genetically engineered human cells lacking CTLH E3 supramolecular assemblies. Despite the diversity of mutations, 15 of 16 tested mutants impaired at least one CTLH E3 complex function contributing to complex assembly and interactions, thus providing first mechanistic insights into SKDEAS pathology.