SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Mammalian mitochondrial iron–sulfur cluster biogenesis and transfer and related human diseases
    W Zhang, L Xu, H Zhao, K Li (2021)
    PMC10235907 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10235907/
    snippet: … Fe–S Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 4 (MMDS4) … Fe–S Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 5 (MMDS5) … Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome MMDS …
    abstract: As a cofactor, iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster binds to proteins or enzymes that play important roles in various important biological processes, including DNA synthesis and repair, mitochondrial function, gene transcription and translation. In mammals, the core components involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis are considered to include the scaffold protein ISCU, cysteine desulfurase NFS1 and its accessory proteins ISD11 and ACP, and frataxin (FXN). Proteins involved in Fe-S cluster transfer have been found to include HSC20/HSPA9, as chaperone system, and Fe-S cluster carriers. The biosynthesis and transfer of Fe-S clusters to Fe-S recipients require fine-tune regulation. Recently, significant progress has been made in the structure and mechanism of mitochondrial Fe-S biosynthesis and transfer. Based on, especially, the development of DNA sequencing technology, bioinformatics, and gene editing technology, diseases caused by mutations of Fe-S cluster-related genes have been revealed in recent years, promoting the rapid development in the field of Fe-S and human health. This review focuses on the function of genes involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis and transfer and on the diseases caused by the mutations of the related genes. Finally, some questions we are facing are raised, new hypotheses presented, and the perspectives discussed.

[2] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis from molecular understanding to clinical disease
    M Alfadhel, M Nashabat, QA Ali, K Hundallah (2017)
    https://nsj.org.sa/content/22/1/4.short
    snippet: … A reduction reaction then takes place by FDX2 and FDXR to … 5 disorders: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 … gene defect has two clinical phenotypes: one is sideroblastic …
    abstract: Iron_sulfur clusters (ISCs) are known to play a major role in various protein functions. Located in the mitochondria, cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus, they contribute to various core cellular functions. Until recently, only a few human diseases related to mitochondrial ISC biogenesis defects have been described. Such diseases include Friedreich ataxia, combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 19, infantile complex II/III deficiency defect, hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis and mitochondrial muscle myopathy, lipoic acid biosynthesis defects, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes and non ketotic hyperglycinemia due to glutaredoxin 5 gene defect. Disorders of mitochondrial import, export and translation, including sideroblastic anemia with ataxia, EVEN-PLUS syndrome and mitochondrial complex I deficiency due to nucleotide-binding protein-like protein gene defect, have also been implicated in ISC biogenesis defects. With advances in next generation sequencing technologies, more disorders related to ISC biogenesis defects are expected to be elucidated. In this article, we aim to shed the light on mitochondrial ISC biogenesis, related proteins and their function, pathophysiology, clinical phenotypes of related disorders, diagnostic approach, and future implications.

[3] Mammalian iron sulfur cluster biogenesis and human diseases
    N Maio, TA Rouault (2022)
    PMID:35098635 DOI:10.1002/iub.2597 PMC9247042 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9247042/
    snippet: … pathway cause distinctive phenotypes of rare human diseases, … FDXR mutations cause sensorial neuropathies and expand … Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 2 (MMDS2). (c.…

[4] Whole Exome Sequencing widens the genetic landscape of Hereditary Optic Neuropathies
    C Fiorini (2022)
    https://amsdottorato.unibo.it/id/eprint/10126/
    snippet: … , that cause both syndromic phenotypes with ON and isolated DOA-like phenotypes (Fig. 5) (31). In … A common manifestation is multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome (MMDS), a …

[5] Molecular pathways for the maturation of mitochondrial and cytosolic human Fe-S proteins
    B Bargagna (2024)
    https://flore.unifi.it/handle/2158/1413833
    snippet: … -dependent electron transfer chain of ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) to ferredoxin FDX2. Of the four … Abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome type 2 with hyperglycinemia (…

[6] 620887 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620887
    snippet: (2017) reported 14 patients, aged 1.6 to 20 years, from 13 families with a multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome and mutation in the FDXR ...

[7] multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 9B
    (authors not shown)
    https://zfin.org/DOID:0070736
    snippet: OMIM Phenotype ID. FDXR · fdxr. Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 9B, multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 9B · 620887. 1 - 1 of 1. Show. 10 ...

[8] Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 9b (MMDS9B)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/multiple_mitochondrial_dysfunctions_syndrome_9b
    snippet: FDXR, Ferredoxin Reductase, Protein Coding, 812.5. Molecular basis known ▽1 ... Symptoms & Phenotypes for Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 9b.

[9] A Case of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 1 ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:42192213 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.70213 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ajmg.a.70213
    snippet: ... FDXR gene defects ... proposed the term 'Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome' to describe affected individuals whose phenotypes ...
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1, MIM #605711) due to NFU1 gene defects is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism associated with reduced function of NFU1 iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) scaffold protein. This disorder demonstrates variable clinical features including hypotonia, epileptic encephalopathy, respiratory failure, lactic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, and hemodynamic instability. One unique feature of this mitochondrial disorder is the common manifestation of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), for which the pathophysiologic mechanism is not well defined to date. Here, we report a case of infantile-onset lactic acidosis, refractory epilepsy with encephalopathy, hyperglycinemia, and severe PAH in a patient who underwent rapid genome sequencing (GS) which identified compound heterozygous variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We additionally review the literature on published cases of MMDS1 including developments in the understanding of the intracellular impact of defective ISC proteins. Recent studies delineate a multifactorial pathogenesis including globally dysregulated energy metabolism, specific deficiencies in oxidative phosphorylation, and excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. A key difference between established animal models of this disorder and human cases published to date is that the previously described sex-based phenotype discrepancy in rats was not recapitulated in this review. Identification of the clinical combination of lactic acidosis, PAH, and hyperglycinemia during diagnostic evaluation should raise suspicion for a defect of the ISC pathway, and further investigations of the cellular pathophysiology of this disorder may provide insight into the phenotypic spectrum of human disease and potential therapeutic targets.

[10] 605711 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/605711
    snippet: Entry - #605711 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS SYNDROME 1; MMDS1 - OMIM - (OMIM.ORG) ... FDXR gene (103270) on chromosome 17q25. ▻ Clinical ...