SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? Report on a new patient with a tricho-rhino-phalangeal like phenotype
    A Mégarbané, C Mehawej, D Mahfoud… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721224000363
    snippet: … those seen in trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS). These … variant was identified in the FBXO11 gene (NM_001190274.2: c.… the clinical spectrum linked to FBXO11 and highlight the …
    abstract: Here we report the case of a young boy with developmental delay, thin sparse hair, early closure of the anterior fontanel, bilateral choanal atresia, brachyturicephaly; and dysmorphic features closely resembling those seen in trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS). These features include sparse hair, sparse lateral eyebrows, a bulbous pear shaped nose, a long philtrum, thin lips, small/hypoplastic nails, pes planovalgus; bilateral cone-shaped epiphyses at the proximal 5th phalanx, slender long bones, coxa valga, mild scoliosis, and delayed bone age. Given that TRPS had been excluded by a thorough genetic analysis, whole exome sequencing was performed and a heterozygous likely pathogenic variant was identified in the FBXO11 gene (NM_001190274.2: c.1781A > G; p. His594Arg), confirming the diagnosis of the newly individualized IDDFBA syndrome: Intellectual Developmental Disorder, dysmorphic Facies, and Behavioral Abnormalities (OMIM# 618,089). Our findings further delineate the clinical spectrum linked to FBXO11 and highlight the importance of investigating further cases with mutations in this gene to establish a potential genotype-phenotype correlation.

[2] MicroRNAs and breast cancer stem cells: potential role in breast cancer therapy
    F Vahidian, H Mohammadi… (2019)
    DOI:10.1002/jcp.27246 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jcp.27246
    snippet: … Also, the therapeutic potential of miRNA as an effective method for the treatment of BCSC was … miRNA621 sensitizes breast cancer to chemotherapy by suppressing FBXO11 and …
    abstract: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can control cancer and cancer stem cells (CSCs), and this topic has drawn immense attention recently. Stem cells are a tiny population of a bulk of tumor cells that have enormous potential in expansion and metastasis of the tumor. miRNA have a crucial role in the management of the function of stem cells. This role is to either promote or suppress the tumor. In this review, we investigated the function and different characteristics of CSCs and function of the miRNAs that are related to them. We also demonstrated the role and efficacy of these miRNAs in breast cancer and breast cancer stem cells (BCSC). Eventually, we revealed the metastasis, tumor formation, and their role in the apoptosis process. Also, the therapeutic potential of miRNA as an effective method for the treatment of BCSC was described. Extensive research is required to investigate the employment or suppression of these miRNAs for therapeutics approached in different cancers in the future.

[3] Interpretable clinical genomics with a likelihood ratio paradigm
    PN Robinson, V Ravanmehr, JOB Jacobsen… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(20)30230-5
    snippet: Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)-based analysis has become standard for genomic diagnostics of rare diseases. Current algorithms use a variety of semantic and statistical …
    abstract: Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)-based analysis has become standard for genomic diagnostics of rare diseases. Current algorithms use a variety of semantic and statistical approaches to prioritize the typically long lists of genes with candidate pathogenic variants. These algorithms do not provide robust estimates of the strength of the predictions beyond the placement in a ranked list, nor do they provide measures of how much any individual phenotypic observation has contributed to the prioritization result. However, given that the overall success rate of genomic diagnostics is only around 25%-50% or less in many cohorts, a good ranking cannot be taken to imply that the gene or disease at rank one is necessarily a good candidate. Here, we present an approach to genomic diagnostics that exploits the likelihood ratio (LR) framework to provide an estimate of (1) the posttest probability of candidate diagnoses, (2) the LR for each observed HPO phenotype, and (3) the predicted pathogenicity of observed genotypes. LIkelihood Ratio Interpretation of Clinical AbnormaLities (LIRICAL) placed the correct diagnosis within the first three ranks in 92.9% of 384 case reports comprising 262 Mendelian diseases, and the correct diagnosis had a mean posttest probability of 67.3%. Simulations show that LIRICAL is robust to many typically encountered forms of genomic and phenomic noise. In summary, LIRICAL provides accurate, clinically interpretable results for phenotype-driven genomic diagnostics.

[4] Clinical and Sociodemographic analysis, and Diagnostic Research of Undiagnosed Pediatric Patients Suspected to Have Genetic Disorders
    김수연 (2022)
    https://s-space.snu.ac.kr/handle/10371/188348
    snippet: … We reviewed all the presenting symptoms requiring special examination at separate clinics for diagnosis (Figure 4 and 5). Multiple organ involvement or co-existed symptoms were …

[5] Low-pass genome sequencing: validation and diagnostic utility from 409 clinical cases of low-pass genome sequencing for the detection of copy number …
    A Chaubey, S Shenoy, A Mathur, Z Ma… (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S152515782030297X
    snippet: … with a clinical suspicion of trichorhinophalangeal syndrome. An approximately 14,138-bp … gene associated with autosomal dominant trichorhinophalangeal syndrome types I and III (…
    abstract: DNA copy number variants (CNVs) account for approximately 300 Mb of sequence variation in the normal human genome. Significant numbers of pathogenic CNVs contribute toward human genetic disorders. Recent studies suggest a higher diagnostic and clinical significance of low-pass genome sequencing (LP-GS) compared with chromosomal microarrays (CMAs). The performance metrics of the 5X LP-GS was compared with CMA to validate a low-cost and high-throughput method. LP-GS test performed on 409 samples (including 78 validation and 331 clinical) was evaluated using American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines. The CNV accuracy, precision, specificity, and sensitivity were calculated to be 100% for all previously characterized CNVs by CMA. Samples (n = 6) run at both approximately 30X GS and approximately 5X GS (LP-GS) average depth detected a concordance of 89.43% to 91.8% and 77.42% to 89.86% for overall single-nucleotide variants and insertions/deletions, respectively. In the 331 clinical samples, 17.2% each were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic and uncertain clinical significance. In addition, several cases with pathogenic CNVs were detected that were missed by CMA. This study demonstrates that LP-GS (5X GS) was able to reliably detect absence of heterozygosity, microdeletion/microduplication syndromes, and intragenic CNVs with higher coverage and resolution over the genome. Because of lower cost, higher resolution, and greater sensitivity of this test, our study in combination with other reports could be used in an evidence-based review by professional societies to recommend replacing CMAs.

[6] How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38679370/
    snippet: by A Mégarbané · 2024 · Cited by 2 — ... trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS). These features include sparse hair, … ... How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? Report ...
    abstract: Here we report the case of a young boy with developmental delay, thin sparse hair, early closure of the anterior fontanel, bilateral choanal atresia, brachyturicephaly; and dysmorphic features closely resembling those seen in trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS). These features include sparse hair, sparse lateral eyebrows, a bulbous pear shaped nose, a long philtrum, thin lips, small/hypoplastic nails, pes planovalgus; bilateral cone-shaped epiphyses at the proximal 5th phalanx, slender long bones, coxa valga, mild scoliosis, and delayed bone age. Given that TRPS had been excluded by a thorough genetic analysis, whole exome sequencing was performed and a heterozygous likely pathogenic variant was identified in the FBXO11 gene (NM_001190274.2: c.1781A > G; p. His594Arg), confirming the diagnosis of the newly individualized IDDFBA syndrome: Intellectual Developmental Disorder, dysmorphic Facies, and Behavioral Abnormalities (OMIM# 618,089). Our findings further delineate the clinical spectrum linked to FBXO11 and highlight the importance of investigating further cases with mutations in this gene to establish a potential genotype-phenotype correlation.

[7] Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS)
    (authors not shown)
    https://allie.dbcls.jp/pubmed/TRPS%3BTrichorhinophalangeal%20syndrome.html?lang=ja
    snippet: ... Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome in mice. ---. 5. 2024. How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? Report on a new patient with a tricho-rhino ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>There are three distinct subtypes of Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS); TRPS type I, TRPS type II and TRPS type III. Features common to all three subtypes include sparse, slowly growing scalp hair, laterally sparse eyebrows, a bulbous tip of the nose (pear-shaped), and protruding ears. Langer-Giedion syndrome (LGS) or TRPS type II is a contiguous gene syndrome on 8q24.1, involving loss of functional copies of the TRPS1 and EXT1 genes. We report a male patient that was referred to the Department of Medical Genetics due to hypotonia and dysmorphic facial features.<h4>Results</h4>Cytogenetic and array- Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) analysis revealed that the patient was a carrier of an interstitial deletion at 8q23.1-q24.12 of 12,5 Mb. Parental karyotype indicated that the father carried an apparently balanced insertion: 46, ΧΥ, der(10)ins(10;8)(q22;q23q24).<h4>Conclusions</h4>This is the first report of an apparently balanced insertion including chromosomes 8 and 10 contributing to the etiology of LGS/ TRPS type II. Τimely diagnosis of parental balanced chromosomal rearrangements can reduce the risk of subsequent miscarriages as well as abnormal offspring.

[8] Pear-shaped nose (Concept Id: C1853482)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/377912
    snippet: Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS) comprises TRPS I (caused by a ... How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? Report on a new patient ...

[9] New ocular findings in a patient with a novel pathogenic ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1091853122001446
    snippet: by RG Silva · 2022 · Cited by 5 — How many phenotypes for the FBXO11 related disease? Report on a new patient ... trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS). These features include sparse ...
    abstract: Intellectual developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies and behavioral abnormalities (IDDFBA) is a recently described autosomal dominant entity caused by pathogenic variants, mostly de novo, in the FBXO11 gene. It presents in the first years of life with highly variable clinical manifestations. The main features of IDDFBA include borderline-to-severe intellectual disability, behavioral problems, hypotonia, facial dysmorphisms, minor skeletal abnormalities, and recurrent infections. Although eye problems, such as refractive errors, eye misalignment and minor visual changes, have been described in about 48% of patients, a major ocular defect, namely, bilateral optic nerve hypoplasia, has been reported in the literature only once. We report an 8-year-old boy with a novel de novo pathogenic variant in FBXO11 gene (NM_001190274.1: c.1166dup, p.Cys390Metfs∗3) and a complex ophthalmological phenotype, consisting of right microphthalmia, very shallow anterior chamber, and persistent pupillary membrane, right dense nuclear cataract, bilateral optic nerve hypoplasia, and bilateral horizontal manifest nystagmus.

[10] Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:42705688 DOI:10.1136/bcr-2025-270257 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/books/NBK425926/
    snippet: ... missense variants, all missense variants are located in exons 6 and 7. Missense variants in TRPS1 are associated with more severe phenotypes ...
    abstract: Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS) is a very rare genetic disorder comprised of three recognised types, all characterised by short, deformed fingers with cone-shaped epiphyses (CSE) visible on radiographs. TRPS type I is the most common subtype. We report the case of a girl in her mid-teens who presented with the characteristic clinical and radiological features of TRPS type I. The diagnosis was confirmed by whole-exome sequencing, which identified a novel heterozygous variant in the <i>TRPS1</i> gene. This case highlights a structured diagnostic approach to CSE and may further expand the mutational spectrum of TRPS type I.