SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Outlining the complex pathway of mammalian Fe-S cluster biogenesis
    N Maio, TA Rouault (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/biochemical-sciences/abstract/S0968-0004(20)30034-7
    snippet: … The spectrum of diseases caused by inherited defects in … donation (mediated by FDX/FDXR), followed by binding of the … Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes (MMDSs) have …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters (ISCs) are ubiquitous cofactors essential to numerous fundamental cellular processes. Assembly of ISCs and their insertion into apoproteins involves the function of complex cellular machineries that operate in parallel in the mitochondrial and cytosolic/nuclear compartments of mammalian cells. The spectrum of diseases caused by inherited defects in genes that encode the Fe-S assembly proteins has recently expanded to include multiple rare human diseases, which manifest distinctive combinations and severities of global and tissue-specific impairments. In this review, we provide an overview of our understanding of ISC biogenesis in mammalian cells, discuss recent work that has shed light on the molecular interactions that govern ISC assembly, and focus on human diseases caused by failures of the biogenesis pathway.

[2] Mammalian iron sulfur cluster biogenesis and human diseases
    N Maio, TA Rouault (2022)
    PMC9247042 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9247042/
    snippet: … Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes (MMDSs) have recently emerged as a group of … FDXR mutations cause sensorial neuropathies and expand the spectrum of mitochondrial …

[3] Mammalian mitochondrial iron–sulfur cluster biogenesis and transfer and related human diseases
    W Zhang, L Xu, H Zhao, K Li (2021)
    PMC10235907 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10235907/
    snippet: … Fe–S Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 4 (MMDS4) … Fe–S Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 5 (MMDS5) … Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome MMDS …
    abstract: As a cofactor, iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster binds to proteins or enzymes that play important roles in various important biological processes, including DNA synthesis and repair, mitochondrial function, gene transcription and translation. In mammals, the core components involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis are considered to include the scaffold protein ISCU, cysteine desulfurase NFS1 and its accessory proteins ISD11 and ACP, and frataxin (FXN). Proteins involved in Fe-S cluster transfer have been found to include HSC20/HSPA9, as chaperone system, and Fe-S cluster carriers. The biosynthesis and transfer of Fe-S clusters to Fe-S recipients require fine-tune regulation. Recently, significant progress has been made in the structure and mechanism of mitochondrial Fe-S biosynthesis and transfer. Based on, especially, the development of DNA sequencing technology, bioinformatics, and gene editing technology, diseases caused by mutations of Fe-S cluster-related genes have been revealed in recent years, promoting the rapid development in the field of Fe-S and human health. This review focuses on the function of genes involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis and transfer and on the diseases caused by the mutations of the related genes. Finally, some questions we are facing are raised, new hypotheses presented, and the perspectives discussed.

[4] Disorders of Lipoic Acid and Iron-Sulfur Protein Metabolism
    A Ribes, F Tort (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-67727-5_27 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-67727-5_27
    snippet: … carrying mutations in ISCU and FDX2 had a similar clinical phenotype showing late- … FDXR mutations cause sensorial neuropathies and expand the spectrum of mitochondrial Fe-S-…

[5] NMR as a tool to investigate the processes of mitochondrial and cytosolic iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis
    K Cai, JL Markley (2018)
    PMID:30200358 DOI:10.3390/molecules23092213 https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/23/9/2213
    snippet: … ) cannot be reduced by FDXR while bound to (NIA) 2 . NMR spectra indicated that the apo forms … diseases now categorized as multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndromes MMDS3 (…
    abstract: Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters, the ubiquitous protein cofactors found in all kingdoms of life, perform a myriad of functions including nitrogen fixation, ribosome assembly, DNA repair, mitochondrial respiration, and metabolite catabolism. The biogenesis of Fe-S clusters is a multi-step process that involves the participation of many protein partners. Recent biophysical studies, involving X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, mass spectrometry (MS), and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), have greatly improved our understanding of these steps. In this review, after describing the biological importance of iron sulfur proteins, we focus on the contributions of NMR spectroscopy has made to our understanding of the structures, dynamics, and interactions of proteins involved in the biosynthesis of Fe-S cluster proteins.

[6] 620887 - MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620887
    snippet: (2017) reported 14 patients, aged 1.6 to 20 years, from 13 families with a multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome and mutation in the FDXR ...

[7] Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 9b (MMDS9B)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/multiple_mitochondrial_dysfunctions_syndrome_9b
    snippet: 15 Pathways related to Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 9b: ; 5, Iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis, 1/15, 3. FDXR ; 6, Endogenous sterols, 1/26, 3. FDXR.

[8] Ferroptosis is a novel pathogenic mechanism of FDXR-related ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41436440 DOI:10.1038/s41420-025-02840-y PMC12727864 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12727864/
    snippet: by T Campbell · 2025 · Cited by 4 — Clinically, FDXR-related mitochondriopathy is characterized by optic atrophy, neurological dysfunction, movement disorder, hearing loss, ...
    abstract: Loss-of-function variants in the ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) gene result in a primary mitochondrial disease in humans, involving abnormal mitochondrial iron accumulation. However, the molecular mechanism is not fully understood. To better understand the underlying pathology of FDXR-related disease, we generated a mouse model corresponding to the hotspot variant found in humans. We demonstrated increased lipid peroxidation in the inner mitochondrial and plasma membranes, resulting in susceptibility to ferroptosis. Closer examination revealed that disruption of the NRF2 pathway and its target gene SLC7A11 appear to play important roles in this pathogenic process. Finally, administration of the NRF2 activator omaveloxolone, which was recently approved by the FDA for treatment of Friedreich's ataxia, helps mitigate the pathogenesis. Together, our results suggest that ferroptosis is a novel underlying mechanism of FDXR-related disease and that activation of NRF2 could be an immediate, viable treatment option for individuals with FDXR-related disease and other conditions involving aberrant iron metabolism.

[9] A Case of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 1 ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.70213 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ajmg.a.70213
    snippet: ... FDXR gene defects ... proposed the term 'Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome' to describe affected individuals whose phenotypes ...
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1, MIM #605711) due to NFU1 gene defects is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism associated with reduced function of NFU1 iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) scaffold protein. This disorder demonstrates variable clinical features including hypotonia, epileptic encephalopathy, respiratory failure, lactic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, and hemodynamic instability. One unique feature of this mitochondrial disorder is the common manifestation of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), for which the pathophysiologic mechanism is not well defined to date. Here, we report a case of infantile-onset lactic acidosis, refractory epilepsy with encephalopathy, hyperglycinemia, and severe PAH in a patient who underwent rapid genome sequencing (GS) which identified compound heterozygous variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We additionally review the literature on published cases of MMDS1 including developments in the understanding of the intracellular impact of defective ISC proteins. Recent studies delineate a multifactorial pathogenesis including globally dysregulated energy metabolism, specific deficiencies in oxidative phosphorylation, and excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. A key difference between established animal models of this disorder and human cases published to date is that the previously described sex-based phenotype discrepancy in rats was not recapitulated in this review. Identification of the clinical combination of lactic acidosis, PAH, and hyperglycinemia during diagnostic evaluation should raise suspicion for a defect of the ISC pathway, and further investigations of the cellular pathophysiology of this disorder may provide insight into the phenotypic spectrum of human disease and potential therapeutic targets.

[10] A Review of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunction Syndromes ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Review-of-Multiple-Mitochondrial-Dysfunction-with-Lebigot-Schiff/33a39c2be6471bccd33c431d6e33ffe38073573b
    snippet: A Case of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 1 and Review of the Literature. ... FDXR‐dependent electron transfer pathway from ... Clinical, biochemical, ...
    abstract: Mitochondrial proteins carrying iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are involved in essential cellular pathways such as oxidative phosphorylation, lipoic acid synthesis, and iron metabolism. NFU1, BOLA3, IBA57, ISCA2, and ISCA1 are involved in the last steps of the maturation of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S]-containing proteins. Since 2011, mutations in their genes leading to five multiple mitochondrial dysfunction syndromes (MMDS types 1 to 5) were reported. The aim of this systematic review is to describe all reported MMDS-patients. Their clinical, biological, and radiological data and associated genotype will be compared to each other. Despite certain specific clinical elements such as pulmonary hypertension or dilated cardiomyopathy in MMDS type 1 or 2, respectively, nearly all of the patients with MMDS presented with severe and early onset leukoencephalopathy. Diagnosis could be suggested by high lactate, pyruvate, and glycine levels in body fluids. Genetic analysis including large gene panels (Next Generation Sequencing) or whole exome sequencing is needed to confirm diagnosis.