SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual disability with variable brain anomalies
    K Platzer, H Sticht, SL Edwards, W Allen… (2019)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(18)30459-2
    snippet: … or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum … of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of … spectrum of MAPK8IP3-related neurodevelopmental disorders …
    abstract: Using exome sequencing, we have identified de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 13 unrelated individuals presenting with an overlapping phenotype of mild to severe intellectual disability. The de novo variants comprise six missense variants, three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, cerebral or cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum were consistent among individuals harboring recurrent de novo missense variants. MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be involved in the retrograde axonal-transport machinery, but many of its specific functions are yet to be elucidated. Using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to target six conserved amino acid positions in Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that two of the six investigated human alterations led to a significantly elevated density of axonal lysosomes, and five variants were associated with adverse locomotion. Reverse-engineering normalized the observed adverse effects back to wild-type levels. Combining genetic, phenotypic, and functional findings, as well as the significant enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our total cohort of 27,232 individuals who underwent exome sequencing, we implicate de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability and variable brain anomalies.

[2] Plenary Sessions
    JG Gleeson
    https://search.proquest.com/openview/6678fb930503fcddaed85fcea256dc98/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=2044126
    snippet: … de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in thirteen unrelated individuals … or cerebellar atrophy and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. … in MAPK8IP3 as a novel cause of a neurodevelopmental …

[3] The genetic landscape of polymicrogyria
    J James, M Iype, MO Surendran… (2022)
    PMC9540929 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9540929/
    snippet: … [117] De novo variations in MAPK8IP3, which is a crucial … /cerebellar atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.[118] … genes contributed to neurodevelopmental pathways including …
    abstract: Polymicrogyria (PMG) is a relatively common complex malformation with cortical development, characterized by an exorbitant number of abnormally tiny gyri separated by shallow sulci. It is a neuronal migration disorder. Familial cases of PMG and the manifestation of PMG in patients with chromosomal aberrations and mutations indicate their important role of genetics in this disorder. The highly stereotyped and well-conserved nature of the cortical folding pattern in humans is suggestive of the genetic regulation of the process. The chromosomal abnormalities observed in PMG include deletions, duplications, chromosomal rearrangements, and aneuploidies. Two of the most common deletions in PMG are 22q11.2 deletion and 1p36 deletion. Further, mutations in several genes such as <i>GPR56, TUBB2B, SRPX2, PAX6, EOMES, WDR62, TUBA8, KIAA1279</i>, and <i>COL18A1</i> are known to be associated with PMG. Intriguingly, these genes are responsible only for a small number of cases of PMG. The protein products of these genes are implicated in diverse molecular and cellular functions. Taken together, PMG could be the result of the disruption of several biological pathways. Different modes of Mendelian inheritance and non-Mendelian inheritance are seen in PMG. We have suggested a gene panel that can be used for the detection of malformations of cortical development.

[4] Recent advances in epilepsy genomics and genetic testing
    M Hebbar, HC Mefford (2020)
    PMC7076331 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7076331/
    snippet: … Neurodevelopmental disorder with seizures and speech and walking impairment … Mega-corpus-callosum syndrome with cerebellar hypoplasia and cortical malformations …
    abstract: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a group of severe, early onset epilepsies characterized by refractory seizures, developmental delay or regression associated with ongoing epileptic activity, and generally poor prognosis. DEE is genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous, and there is a plethora of genetic testing options to investigate the rapidly growing list of epilepsy genes. However, more than 50% of patients with DEE remain without a genetic diagnosis despite state-of-the-art genetic testing. In this review, we discuss the major advances in epilepsy genomics that have surfaced in recent years. The goal of this review is to reach a larger audience and build a better understanding of pathogenesis and genetic testing options in DEE.

[5] Associated anomalies in cases with agenesis of the corpus callosum
    C Stoll, B Dott, MP Roth (2019)
    PMID:31444900 DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.61330 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.61330
    snippet: … absence of the corpus callosum; hypogenesis of the corpus callosum also known as … corpus callosum, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, a condition in which the corpus callosum …
    abstract: Agenesis of corpus callosum (ACC) is an uncommon congenital anomaly, its etiology is unclear and its pathogenesis is controversial. Cases with ACC often have other non-ACC associated congenital anomalies. The purpose of this study was to assess the prevalence and the types of these associated anomalies in a defined population. The associated anomalies in cases with ACC were collected in all live births, stillbirths, and terminations of pregnancy during 29 years in 387,067 consecutive births in the area covered by our population-based registry of congenital malformations. Of the 99 cases with ACC, representing a prevalence of 2.56 per 10,000, 73 (73.7%) had associated anomalies. There were 16 (16.2%) cases with chromosomal abnormalities, and 13 (13.2%) nonchromosomal recognized dysmorphic conditions including syndromes two each: Aicardi, Dandy-Walker, and fetal alcoholism. Forty-four (44.4%) of the cases had nonsyndromic multiple congenital anomalies (MCA). Anomalies in the musculoskeletal, the urogenital, the central nervous, the cardiovascular, and the digestive systems were the most common other anomalies in the cases with MCA. The anomalies associated with ACC could be classified into a recognizable malformation syndrome in 29 out of the 73 cases (39.7%) with associated anomalies. This study included special strengths: it is population-based, each affected child was examined by a geneticist, all elective terminations were ascertained, and the surveillance for anomalies was continued until 2 years of age. In conclusion the overall prevalence of associated anomalies, three of four cases, emphasizes the need for a screening for other anomalies in cases with ACC.

[6] C206532 - Neurodevelopmental Disorder with ... - EVS Explore
    (authors not shown)
    https://evsexplore.semantics.cancer.gov/evsexplore/concept/ncit/C206532
    snippet: There may be associated brain abnormalities include cerebellar and/or cerebral atrophy, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. ... MAPK8IP3 Gene.

[7] MAPK8IP3 - PanelApp
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/genes/MAPK8IP3
    snippet: Hereditary ataxia and cerebellar ... corpus callosum anomalies; Neurodevelopmental disorder with or without variable brain abnormalities, OMIM:618443 ...

[8] Entry - #618443 - NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/618443
    snippet: MAPK8IP3, 605431 · Clinical Synopsis ... cerebellar atrophy, loss of white matter volume, thin corpus callosum, and perisylvian polymicrogyria.

[9] Lysosome function and dysfunction in hereditary spastic paraplegias
    D Edmison, L Wang, S Gowrishankar (2021)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3425/11/2/152
    snippet: … thinning of the corpus callosum, white matter abnormalities, and … de novo variants of mapk8ip3 have been identified in … , hypoplasia of corpus callosum, and cerebral or cerebellar …
    abstract: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs) are a genetically diverse group of inherited neurological diseases with over 80 associated gene loci. Over the last decade, research into mechanisms underlying HSPs has led to an emerging interest in lysosome dysfunction. In this review, we highlight the different classes of HSPs that have been linked to lysosome defects: (1) a subset of complex HSPs where mutations in lysosomal genes are causally linked to the diseases, (2) other complex HSPs where mutation in genes encoding membrane trafficking adaptors lead to lysosomal defects, and (3) a subset of HSPs where mutations affect genes encoding proteins whose function is primarily linked to a different cellular component or organelle such as microtubule severing and Endoplasmic Reticulum-shaping, while also altering to lysosomes. Interestingly, aberrant axonal lysosomes, associated with the latter two subsets of HSPs, are a key feature observed in other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease. We discuss how altered lysosome function and trafficking may be a critical contributor to HSP pathology and highlight the need for examining these features in the cortico-spinal motor neurons of HSP mutant models.

[10] Recurrent de novo MAPK8IP3 variants cause neurological phenotypes
    S Iwasawa, K Yanagi, A Kikuchi… (2019)
    DOI:10.1002/ana.25481 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ana.25481
    snippet: … two recurrent de novo MAPK8IP3 variants in 5 individuals from four families with spastic diplegia, intellectual disability, cerebral atrophy, and corpus callosum hypoplasia. We showed …
    abstract: c-Jun-amino-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3 (JIP3), encoded by MAPK8IP3, is an adaptor protein of the kinesin-1 complex and essential for axonal transport in neurons. However, an association between MAPK8IP3 variants and human disease has not been established. We identified 5 individuals from four families with recurrent de novo variants c.1732C>T (p.Arg578Cys) and c.3436C>T (p.Arg1146Cys) in MAPK8IP3. The core phenotype includes spastic diplegia, intellectual disability, cerebral atrophy, and corpus callosum hypoplasia. Zebrafish embryos overexpressing human mutant JIP3 showed axon varicosities of the posterior lateral line nerve, suggesting an adverse effect on the developing axons. Our results suggest that MAPK8IP3 variants cause a neurodevelopmental disease. ANN NEUROL 2019;85:927-933.