SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] P415: Congenital methemoglobinemia with concurrent hemoglobin M and SC disease
    M Dulchavsky, S Quinonez, S Singh… (2026)
    https://www.gimopen.org/article/S2949-7744(26)00419-X/fulltext
    snippet: … and expands our understanding of the spectrum of BRWS2. … cases with cardiac concerns in individuals with DHX9 variants… (ID), and autism; microcephaly and abnormal brain MRI …

[2] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH-box helicase DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
    DG Calame, T Guo, C Wang, L Garrett, A Jolly… (2023)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00214-8
    snippet: … spectrum; therefore, we performed a quantitative phenotypic … microcephaly or brain abnormalities, whereas group 2 contained the most severe phenotypes (severe DD/ID, …
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[3] DEAD/DEAH-box RNA helicases shape the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
    C Fiorenzani, A Mossa, S De Rubeis (2025)
    https://www.cell.com/trends/genetics/abstract/S0168-9525(24)00314-7
    snippet: … In-depth phenotypic characterization of DHX30 and DHX9 … these disorders, including microcephaly, polymicrogyria, and … box RH can yield a spectrum of phenotypes, a common theme …
    abstract: The DEAD/DEAH-box family of RNA helicases (RHs) is among the most abundant and conserved in eukaryotes. These proteins catalyze the remodeling of RNAs to regulate their splicing, stability, localization, and translation. Rare genetic variants in DEAD/DEAH-box proteins have recently emerged as being associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Analyses in cellular and animal models have uncovered fundamental roles for these proteins during brain development. We discuss the genetic and functional evidence that implicates DEAD/DEAH-box proteins in brain development and NDDs, with a focus on how structural insights from paralogous genes can be leveraged to advance our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms at play.

[4] The role of DEAD-and DExH-box RNA helicases in neurodevelopmental disorders
    J Lederbauer, S Das, A Piton, D Lessel… (2024)
    DOI:10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/molecular-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1414949/full
    snippet: … wide spectrum of neuronal phenotypes, ranging from ID and loss of speech to severe failures of cortical development including microcephaly … Although, OMIM still does not list DHX9 as …

[5] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … Most recently, MSL2 (MIM: 614802) was identified as a candidate gene with recurrent de novo pathogenic variants in autism spectrum disorder (ASD).In addition, two MSL2 protein-…
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[6] Activity
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/activity/?panel=285&entity=DHX9
    snippet: Cardiac arrhythmias, Cardiac arrhythmias ... Severe microcephaly, Severe multi-system atopic disease with ... Phenotypes for gene: DHX9 were set to ...

[7] Heterozygous loss-of-function DHX9 variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders: Human genetic and experimental evidences
    M Yamada, Y Nitta, T Uehara, H Suzuki, F Miya… (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721223001106
    snippet: … analyses of the phenotypic data collected from the Dhx9 mutant flies, … of the phenotypic data collected from the Dhx9 G416R (p.(… It is noteworthy that the cardiac defects were observed in …
    abstract: DExH-box helicases are involved in unwinding of RNA and DNA. Among the 16 DExH-box genes, monoallelic variants of DHX16, DHX30, DHX34, and DHX37 are known to be associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, DHX30 is well established as a causative gene for neurodevelopmental disorders. Germline variants of DHX9, the closest homolog of DHX30, have not been reported until now as being associated with congenital disorders in humans, except that one de novo heterozygous variant, p.(Arg1052Gln) of the gene was identified during comprehensive screening in a patient with autism; unfortunately, the phenotypic details of this individual are unknown. Herein, we report a patients with a heterozygous de novo missense variant, p.(Gly414Arg) of DHX9 who presented with a short stature, intellectual disability, and ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy. The variant was located in the glycine codon of the ATP-binding site, G-C-G-K-T. To assess the pathogenicity of these variants, we generated transgenic Drosophila lines expressing human wild-type and mutant DHX9 proteins: 1) the mutant proteins showed aberrant localization both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm; 2) ectopic expression of wild-type protein in the visual system led to the rough eye phenotype, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had minimal effect; 3) overexpression of the wild-type protein in the retina led to a reduction in axonal numbers, whereas expression of the mutant proteins had a less pronounced effect. Furthermore, in a gene-editing experiment of Dhx9 G416 to R416, corresponding to p.(Gly414Arg) in humans, heterozygous mice showed a reduced body size, reduced emotionality, and cardiac conduction abnormality. In conclusion, we established that heterozygosity for a loss-of-function variant of DHX9 can lead to a new neurodevelopmental disorder.

[8] O18: Deciphering DHX9 gene pathogenicity in neurological disorders with distinct phenotypes
    T Guo, C Wang, L Gong, D Calame, J Lupski… (2026)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2949774426008150
    snippet: … Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) encompass a spectrum of conditions affecting brain … box helicase 9 (DHX9) gene in patients exhibiting diverse neurological phenotypes, ranging …

[9] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding the DExH ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10432148 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10432148/
    snippet: by DG Calame · 2023 · Cited by 40 — Similarly, DHX9 is among the most abundantly expressed DDX/DHX genes associated with disease phenotypes in the developing brain: its expression ...
    abstract: DExD/H-box RNA helicases (DDX/DHX) are encoded by a large paralogous gene family; in a subset of these human helicase genes, pathogenic variation causes neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) traits and cancer. DHX9 encodes a BRCA1-interacting nuclear helicase regulating transcription, R-loops, and homologous recombination and exhibits the highest mutational constraint of all DDX/DHX paralogs but remains unassociated with disease traits in OMIM. Using exome sequencing and family-based rare-variant analyses, we identified 20 individuals with de novo, ultra-rare, heterozygous missense or loss-of-function (LoF) DHX9 variant alleles. Phenotypes ranged from NDDs to the distal symmetric polyneuropathy axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2). Quantitative Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) analysis demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations with LoF variants causing mild NDD phenotypes and nuclear localization signal (NLS) missense variants causing severe NDD. We investigated DHX9 variant-associated cellular phenotypes in human cell lines. Whereas wild-type DHX9 was restricted to the nucleus, NLS missense variants abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm. Fibroblasts from an individual with an NLS variant also showed abnormal cytoplasmic DHX9 accumulation. CMT2-associated missense variants caused aberrant nucleolar DHX9 accumulation, a phenomenon previously associated with cellular stress. Two NDD-associated variants, p.Gly411Glu and p.Arg761Gln, altered DHX9 ATPase activity. The severe NDD-associated variant p.Arg141Gln did not affect DHX9 localization but instead increased R-loop levels and double-stranded DNA breaks. Dhx9<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited hypoactivity in novel environments, tremor, and sensorineural hearing loss. All together, these results establish DHX9 as a critical regulator of mammalian neurodevelopment and neuronal homeostasis.

[10] Monoallelic variation in DHX9, the gene encoding ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.01.23286475v1.full-text
    snippet: DHX9, underlies neurodevelopment disorders and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease ) without microcephaly or brain abnormalities, whereas Group 2 ...