SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A mouse model of autosomal dominant spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a mutation in Tuba4a
    TJ Hines, JR Funke, SL Pratt, AD Rice, JL Twiss… (2026)
    PMC13014175 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13014175/
    snippet: … Here we describe a mouse model of spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a missense … The Tuba4a Q176P mice have profound ataxia with Purkinje neuron degeneration beginning …
    abstract: Hereditary ataxias are a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by impaired balance and coordination, often due to cerebellar dysfunction. Despite advances in identifying genetic causes, animal models remain essential for dissecting underlying mechanisms and testing therapeutic strategies. Here we describe a mouse model of spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a missense mutation in Tuba4a (n.A626C, p.Gln176Pro). In an ENU mutagenesis screen, a male C57BL/6 J mouse exhibiting muscle wasting and an intention tremor starting at approximately 4 weeks-of-age was identified. The male was bred by in vitro fertilization to BALB/cByJ oocyte donors. Genetic mapping determined dominant inheritance and localized the mutation to Chromosome 1. Genome sequencing revealed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in serine threonine kinase 36 (Stk36Y1003N) and alpha-tubulin 4A (Tuba4aQ176P) in the mapping interval. These SNPs were CRISPR-engineered into C57BL/6 J mice, which confirmed the Tuba4aQ176P variant as the causative mutation. Mutant mice are normal at 3 weeks, except for decrement in muscle response following repetitive nerve stimulation. However, by 30 days these mice have overt ataxia, Purkinje neuron degeneration, and extensive skeletal muscle defects, which contribute to a decreased lifespan. Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia type 11 (SPAX11), congenital myopathy type 26 (CMYO26), and frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 9 (FTDALS9). Our mice exhibit hallmark features of SPAX11 and CMYO26, but do not show motor neuron degeneration. This specificity makes this model a valuable tool for studying cell-type selective effects of TUBA4A mutations in neurodegeneration and myopathy.

[2] Microtubule dysfunction: a common feature of neurodegenerative diseases
    A Sferra, F Nicita, E Bertini (2020)
    PMID:33027950 DOI:10.3390/ijms21197354 https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/21/19/7354
    snippet: … granular cell layer and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. β3-tubulin … Furthermore, similar to TUBA4A, expression of TUBB4A … spastic ataxia and sensory motor axonal neuropathy [94]. …
    abstract: Neurons are particularly susceptible to microtubule (MT) defects and deregulation of the MT cytoskeleton is considered to be a common insult during the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. Evidence that dysfunctions in the MT system have a direct role in neurodegeneration comes from findings that several forms of neurodegenerative diseases are associated with changes in genes encoding tubulins, the structural units of MTs, MT-associated proteins (MAPs), or additional factors such as MT modifying enzymes which modulating tubulin post-translational modifications (PTMs) regulate MT functions and dynamics. Efforts to use MT-targeting therapeutic agents for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases are underway. Many of these agents have provided several benefits when tested on both in vitro and in vivo neurodegenerative model systems. Currently, the most frequently addressed therapeutic interventions include drugs that modulate MT stability or that target tubulin PTMs, such as tubulin acetylation. The purpose of this review is to provide an update on the relevance of MT dysfunctions to the process of neurodegeneration and briefly discuss advances in the use of MT-targeting drugs for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

[3] Potential role of tubulin glutamylation in neurodegenerative diseases
    AM Sheikh, S Tabassum (2023)
    PMID:37905859 DOI:10.4103/1673-5374.385859 PMC11467924 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11467924/
    snippet: … These models, such as Purkinje cell degeneration and … is associated with progressive spastic ataxia and sensory-motor … pathogenic mutations in the TUBA4A gene. Surprisingly, there is …

[4] The molecular landscape of hereditary ataxia: a single-center study
    E Bregant, E Betto, C Dal Secco, J Zucco, F Baldan… (2025)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-025-02744-y https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-025-02744-y
    snippet: … associated with degeneration of Purkinje cells and/or spinocerebellar connections (Galatolo … Indeed, patients displaying pure cerebellar ataxia, spastic ataxia and ataxia with peripheral …
    abstract: Hereditary ataxia (HA) is a heterogeneous group of complex neurological disorders, which represent a diagnostic challenge due to their diverse phenotypes and genetic etiologies. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized the field of neurogenetics, improving the identification of ataxia-associated genes. Notwithstanding, repeat expansions analysis remains a cornerstone in the diagnostic workflow of these diseases. Here we describe the molecular characterization of a consecutive single-center series of 70 patients with genetically uncharacterized HA. Patients' samples were analyzed for known HA-associated repeat expansions as first tier and negative ones were analyzed by whole exome sequencing (WES) as second tier. Overall, we identified pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in 40% (n = 28/70) and variants of unknown significance (VUS) in 20% (n = 14/70) of cases. In particular, 10 patients (14.3%, n = 10/70) presented pathogenic repeat expansions while 18 cases (30%, n = 18/60) harbored at least a single nucleotide variant (SNV) or a copy number variant (CNV) in HA or HSP-related genes. WES allowed assessing complex neurological diseases (i.e., leukodystrophies, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis and atypical xeroderma pigmentosum), which are not usually referred as pure genetic ataxias. Our data suggests that the combined use of repeat expansion analysis and WES, coupled to detailed clinical phenotyping, is able to detect the molecular alteration underpinning ataxia in almost 50% cases, regardless of the hereditary pattern. Indeed, NGS-based tests are fundamental to acknowledge novel HA-associated genes useful to explain the remaining wide fraction of negative tests. Nowadays, this gap is problematic since these patients could not benefit from an etiological diagnosis of their disease that allows prognostic trajectories and prenatal/preimplantation diagnosis.

[5] Deciphering the tubulin language: Molecular determinants and readout mechanisms of the tubulin code in neurons
    R Zocchi, C Compagnucci, E Bertini… (2023)
    PMID:36769099 DOI:10.3390/ijms24032781 https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/24/3/2781
    snippet: … , mutations in the TUBA4A human gene are responsible for the … -onset upper and lower motor neuron degeneration [36]. … in Purkinje cells that causes their post-natal degeneration [55] …
    abstract: Microtubules (MTs) are dynamic components of the cell cytoskeleton involved in several cellular functions, such as structural support, migration and intracellular trafficking. Despite their high similarity, MTs have functional heterogeneity that is generated by the incorporation into the MT lattice of different tubulin gene products and by their post-translational modifications (PTMs). Such regulations, besides modulating the tubulin composition of MTs, create on their surface a "biochemical code" that is translated, through the action of protein effectors, into specific MT-based functions. This code, known as "tubulin code", plays an important role in neuronal cells, whose highly specialized morphologies and activities depend on the correct functioning of the MT cytoskeleton and on its interplay with a myriad of MT-interacting proteins. In recent years, a growing number of mutations in genes encoding for tubulins, MT-interacting proteins and enzymes that post-translationally modify MTs, which are the main players of the tubulin code, have been linked to neurodegenerative processes or abnormalities in neural migration, differentiation and connectivity. Nevertheless, the exact molecular mechanisms through which the cell writes and, downstream, MT-interacting proteins decipher the tubulin code are still largely uncharted. The purpose of this review is to describe the molecular determinants and the readout mechanisms of the tubulin code, and briefly elucidate how they coordinate MT behavior during critical neuronal events, such as neuron migration, maturation and axonal transport.

[6] A mouse model of autosomal dominant spastic ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.64898/2026.03.06.710113v1 https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.06.710113v1
    snippet: However, by 30 days these mice have ataxia, Purkinje neuron ... Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia ...

[7] A mouse model of autosomal dominant spastic ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://read.qxmd.com/read/42680205/a-mouse-model-of-autosomal-dominant-spastic-ataxia-and-myopathy-caused-by-a-mutation-in-tuba4a
    snippet: However, by 30 days these mice have overt ataxia, Purkinje neuron ... Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia type ...
    abstract: Hereditary ataxias are a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by impaired balance and coordination, often due to cerebellar dysfunction. Despite advances in identifying genetic causes, animal models remain essential for dissecting underlying mechanisms and testing therapeutic strategies. Here we describe a mouse model of spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a missense mutation in Tuba4a (n.A626C, p.Gln176Pro). In an ENU mutagenesis screen, a male C57BL/6 J mouse exhibiting muscle wasting and an intention tremor starting at approximately 4 weeks-of-age was identified. The male was bred by in vitro fertilization to BALB/cByJ oocyte donors. Genetic mapping determined dominant inheritance and localized the mutation to Chromosome 1. Genome sequencing revealed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in serine threonine kinase 36 (Stk36Y1003N) and alpha-tubulin 4A (Tuba4aQ176P) in the mapping interval. These SNPs were CRISPR-engineered into C57BL/6 J mice, which confirmed the Tuba4aQ176P variant as the causative mutation. Mutant mice are normal at 3 weeks, except for decrement in muscle response following repetitive nerve stimulation. However, by 30 days these mice have overt ataxia, Purkinje neuron degeneration, and extensive skeletal muscle defects, which contribute to a decreased lifespan. Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia type 11 (SPAX11), congenital myopathy type 26 (CMYO26), and frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 9 (FTDALS9). Our mice exhibit hallmark features of SPAX11 and CMYO26, but do not show motor neuron degeneration. This specificity makes this model a valuable tool for studying cell-type selective effects of TUBA4A mutations in neurodegeneration and myopathy.

[8] A mouse model of autosomal dominant spastic ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/402036083_A_mouse_model_of_autosomal_dominant_spastic_ataxia_and_myopathy_caused_by_a_mutation_in_Tuba4a
    snippet: Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia ... degeneration as would be seen in ALS (Supp Fig 2). Cerebellar Purkinje ...
    abstract: Hereditary ataxias are a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by impaired balance and coordination, often due to cerebellar dysfunction. Despite advances in identifying genetic causes, animal models remain essential for dissecting underlying mechanisms and testing therapeutic strategies. Here we describe a mouse model of spastic ataxia and myopathy caused by a missense mutation in Tuba4a (n.A626C, p.Gln176Pro). In an ENU mutagenesis screen, a male C57BL/6 J mouse exhibiting muscle wasting and an intention tremor starting at approximately 4 weeks-of-age was identified. The male was bred by in vitro fertilization to BALB/cByJ oocyte donors. Genetic mapping determined dominant inheritance and localized the mutation to Chromosome 1. Genome sequencing revealed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in serine threonine kinase 36 (Stk36Y1003N) and alpha-tubulin 4A (Tuba4aQ176P) in the mapping interval. These SNPs were CRISPR-engineered into C57BL/6 J mice, which confirmed the Tuba4aQ176P variant as the causative mutation. Mutant mice are normal at 3 weeks, except for decrement in muscle response following repetitive nerve stimulation. However, by 30 days these mice have overt ataxia, Purkinje neuron degeneration, and extensive skeletal muscle defects, which contribute to a decreased lifespan. Dominant TUBA4A mutations in humans are associated with spastic ataxia type 11 (SPAX11), congenital myopathy type 26 (CMYO26), and frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 9 (FTDALS9). Our mice exhibit hallmark features of SPAX11 and CMYO26, but do not show motor neuron degeneration. This specificity makes this model a valuable tool for studying cell-type selective effects of TUBA4A mutations in neurodegeneration and myopathy.

[9] Ataxia: Dominant
    (authors not shown)
    https://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/ataxia/domatax.html
    snippet: ... Spastic ataxia syndromes. Tremor, Essential: 3q13. TUBA4A · Vanishing white ... MRI or CT: Cortical & Cerebellar atrophy; CNS pathology: Purkinje cell loss ...

[10] TUBB4A mutations result in specific neuronal and oligodendrocytic defects that closely match clinically distinct phenotypes
    J Curiel, G Rodríguez Bey… (2017)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/26/22/4506/4096718
    snippet: … of lack of myelination, cerebellar atrophy and preserved basal … ), the cerebellar cortex is severely atrophic with massive loss of … layer and the Purkinje cells and marked loss of putaminal …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are heritable disorders defined by lack of development of brain myelin, but the cellular mechanisms of hypomyelination are often poorly understood. Mutations in TUBB4A, encoding the tubulin isoform tubulin beta class IVA (Tubb4a), result in the symptom complex of hypomyelination with atrophy of basal ganglia and cerebellum (H-ABC). Additionally, TUBB4A mutations are known to result in a broad phenotypic spectrum, ranging from primary dystonia (DYT4), isolated hypomyelination with spastic quadriplegia, and an infantile onset encephalopathy, suggesting multiple cell types may be involved. We present a study of the cellular effects of TUBB4A mutations responsible for H-ABC (p.Asp249Asn), DYT4 (p.Arg2Gly), a severe combined phenotype with hypomyelination and encephalopathy (p.Asn414Lys), as well as milder phenotypes causing isolated hypomyelination (p.Val255Ile and p.Arg282Pro). We used a combination of histopathological, biochemical and cellular approaches to determine how these different mutations may have variable cellular effects in neurons and/or oligodendrocytes. Our results demonstrate that specific mutations lead to either purely neuronal, combined neuronal and oligodendrocytic or purely oligodendrocytic defects that closely match their respective clinical phenotypes. Thus, the DYT4 mutation that leads to phenotypes attributable to neuronal dysfunction results in altered neuronal morphology, but with unchanged tubulin quantity and polymerization, with normal oligodendrocyte morphology and myelin gene expression. Conversely, mutations associated with isolated hypomyelination (p.Val255Ile and p.Arg282Pro) and the severe combined phenotype (p.Asn414Lys) resulted in normal neuronal morphology but were associated with altered oligodendrocyte morphology, myelin gene expression, and microtubule dysfunction. The H-ABC mutation (p.Asp249Asn) that exhibits a combined neuronal and myelin phenotype had overlapping cellular defects involving both neuronal and oligodendrocyte cell types in vitro. Only mutations causing hypomyelination phenotypes showed altered microtubule dynamics and acted through a dominant toxic gain of function mechanism. The DYT4 mutation had no impact on microtubule dynamics suggesting a distinct mechanism of action. In summary, the different clinical phenotypes associated with TUBB4A reflect the selective and specific cellular effects of the causative mutations. Cellular specificity of disease pathogenesis is 