SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … A study detailing the genetic and clinical findings in these … our cohort who had at least one rare homozygous loss call. … the existence of FILIP1-related arthrogryposis with microcephaly, …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[2] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … by variable severity of multiple congenital joint contractures and associated with … the FILIP1 gene. The phenotypic analysis of our cohort highlights that the most common clinical findings …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[3] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … Presentation of disease features found in our cohort FILIP1-patients defining the congenital … in skeletal muscle and the nervous system is in line with the clinical manifestation of …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[4] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2022)
    https://europepmc.org/article/ppr/ppr556969
    snippet: … by variable severity of multiple congenital joint contractures and associated with … the FILIP1 gene. The phenotypic analysis of our cohort highlights that the most common clinical findings …
    abstract: <title>Abstract</title>  <p>Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.</p>

[5] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … by clinical features, such as distal arthrogryposis or lethal … pediatric cohort, 18% of RYR1-related congenital myopathy … More recently, FILIP1 loss-of-function variants were identified …

[6] Arthrogryposis
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/arthrogryposis
    snippet: Symptoms in patients with arthrogryposis can vary greatly. In most cases, both the arms and legs are involved. Muscle contractures of joints commonly take place ...

[7] Myopathy: Causes, Symptoms, Diagnosis & Treatment
    (authors not shown)
    https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17256-myopathy
    snippet: Symptoms of congenital myopathies usually start at birth or in early ... What are the symptoms of myopathy? Many myopathies share ...

[8] Arthrogryposis: A Review and Update - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:19571066 DOI:10.2106/jbjs.i.00281 PMC2698792 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2698792/
    snippet: by M Bamshad · 2009 · Cited by 532 — Teratogen update: maternal myasthenia gravis as a cause of congenital arthrogryposis ... Native American myopathy: congenital myopathy with cleft palate, skeletal ...

[9] Arthrogryposis
    (authors not shown)
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthrogryposis
    snippet: Arthrogryposis (AMC) is congenital joint contracture in two or more areas of the body. It derives its name from Greek, actually meaning 'curving of joints ...

[10] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita - Symptoms, Causes, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/arthrogryposis-multiplex-congenita/
    snippet: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a term used to describe a group of congenital (present at birth) conditions characterized by joint contractures in ...