SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    A Batla, C Gaddipati (2019)
    PMC6613411 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6613411/
    snippet: … and the evaluation includes MRI brain T2* weighted imaging which reveal symmetrical iron deposition in bilateral globus pallidi and other basal ganglia. The T2 * imaging pattern of iron …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.

[2] Iron pathophysiology in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    S Levi, A Cozzi, P Santambrogio (2019)
    DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_9 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-13-9589-5_9
    snippet: … Abstract Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (… severe iron accumulation in the basal ganglia of the patients’ … The precise function of GTPBP2 is not yet defined, but it has …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of seriously devastating and life-threatening rare monogenic diseases characterized by focal iron accumulation in the brain. The main symptoms of NBIA comprise progressive movement disorder, often including painful dystonia, parkinsonism, mental disability, and early death. Currently, a single established therapy is not available to reverse the progression of these debilitating disorders. The complexity of NBIA emerged from the identification of various causative genes, and up to 15 genes have been identified to date. Although the NBIA genes are involved in different cellular biochemical pathways, they show the common characteristic of generating severe iron accumulation in the basal ganglia of the patients' brains. Thus, the molecular events that lead to brain iron overload and their important roles in the pathophysiology of the diseases are not easy to identify and are poorly understood. This review summarizes the current knowledge on NBIA disorders, with a particular focus on the data describing the role of iron in the pathogenic mechanisms.

[3] Identification of mutation in GTPBP2 in patients of a family with neurodegeneration accompanied by iron deposition in the brain
    E Jaberi, M Rohani, GA Shahidi, S Nafissi, E Arefian… (2016)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0197458015005461
    snippet: … brain iron accumulation, and GTPBP2 may be a novel neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation … characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia, usually in the first decades …
    abstract: We aimed to identify the genetic cause of a neurologic disorder accompanied with mental deficiency in a consanguineous family with 3 affected siblings by linkage analysis and exome sequencing. Iron accumulation in the brain of the patients was a notable phenotypic feature. A full-field electroretinography revealed generalized dysfunction of photoreceptors, bipolar cells, and amacrine cells. A splice site mutation in GTPBP2 that encodes GTP-binding protein 2 was identified in the patients and considered possible cause of their disease. The mutation was empirically shown to cause deletion of exon 9 of the gene and result in production of a truncated protein-lacking conserved C-terminus domains. GTPBP2 is a member of the GTPase superfamily of proteins. A recent report of identification of another splice site mutation in GTPBP2 in mice that causes neurodegeneration, and retinal damage provides supportive evidence for our finding. The conditions in the affected individuals of the family studied may define a novel form of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, and GTPBP2 may be a novel neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation gene.

[4] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation disorders: valuable models aimed at understanding the pathogenesis of iron deposition
    S Levi, V Tiranti (2019)
    https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8247/12/1/27
    snippet: … Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a … in the region of the basal ganglia that can be visualized by … GTPBP1 and GTPBP2, demonstrates that although GTPBP2’…
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a set of neurodegenerative disorders, which includes very rare monogenetic diseases. They are heterogeneous in regard to the onset and the clinical symptoms, while the have in common a specific brain iron deposition in the region of the basal ganglia that can be visualized by radiological and histopathological examinations. Nowadays, 15 genes have been identified as causative for NBIA, of which only two code for iron-proteins, while all the other causative genes codify for proteins not involved in iron management. Thus, how iron participates to the pathogenetic mechanism of most NBIA remains unclear, essentially for the lack of experimental models that fully recapitulate the human phenotype. In this review we reported the recent data on new models of these disorders aimed at highlight the still scarce knowledge of the pathogenesis of iron deposition.

[5] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
    SA Schneider (2025)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780443191763000558
    snippet: … GTPBP2 mutations 20 are another rare cause of NBIA, sometimes referred to as Jaberi–… led to marked reduction of basal ganglia iron but only minor slowing of disease progression. …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.

[6] Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/neurodegeneration_with_brain_iron_accumulation
    snippet: GTPBP2 · SCP2 · VPS13A · REPS1 · AP4M1 · CIAO1 · CRAT · FTH1 · KMT2B · MECR · PSEN1 · SLC39A1 · UBTF ... Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of heritable, mostly recessive, progressive neurodegenerative diseases characterized by iron deposition in the basal ganglia and brainstem. There are no solid global epidemiological data on prevalence and incidence of NBIA subtypes, but registry data and expert opinion suggest PKAN, BPAN, PLAN, and MPAN are the most common subtypes. NBIA disorders present with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms, including movement disorders (dystonia, parkinsonism, chorea), pyramidal involvement (eg, spasticity), speech and cognitive deficits, motor and cognitive slowing, and ocular abnormalities. Treatment remains symptomatic, though several new drugs are in development.<h4>Objectives and methods</h4>Following our review published in 2021, this article provides an updated summary of recent developments. We discuss the rationale of new compounds, summarize clinical trials or-in their absence-preclinical studies for NBIA subtypes. The article is divided into two sections: one section on general approaches based on the shared feature of increased iron in the brain; and the second section on tailor-made, mechanistic treatments for the various NBIA subtypes targeting the specific molecular and cellular pathways of the affected enzyme including gene therapy.<h4>Results and conclusions</h4>In summary, randomized controlled trials in NBIA have not yet demonstrated substantial benefit, neither for iron removal, in general, which appears to be clinically ineffective in most subtypes, except aceruloplasminemia; nor for subtype-specific approaches. Several ongoing studies are exploring more dedicated compounds in this exciting field.

[7] Syndromes of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://neupsykey.com/chapter-16-syndromes-of-neurodegeneration-with-brain-iron-accumulation/
    snippet: The syndromes of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation ... In GTPBP2–associated neurodegeneration, brain MRI shows atrophy of the ...
    abstract: In parallel to recent developments of genetic techniques, understanding of the syndromes of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation has grown considerably. The acknowledged clinical spectrum continues to broaden, with age-dependent presentations being recognized. Postmortem brain examination of genetically confirmed cases has demonstrated Lewy bodies and/or tangles in some forms, bridging the gap to more common neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease. In this review, the major forms of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) are summarized, concentrating on clinical findings and molecular insights. In addition to pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) and phospholipase A2-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN), fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration (FAHN) NBIA, mitochondrial protein-associated neurodegeneration, Kufor-Rakeb disease, aceruloplasminemia, neuroferritinopathy, and SENDA syndrome (static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood) are discussed.

[8] Towards Precision Therapies for Inherited Disorders of ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.5334/tohm.661 https://tremorjournal.org/articles/10.5334/tohm.661
    snippet: by RVV Spaull · 2021 · Cited by 33 — ... GTPBP2 [57, 58], AP4M1 [59], CRAT [16], and ... Dystonia in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation: outcome of bilateral pallidal stimulation.
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) disorders comprise a group of rare but devastating inherited neurological diseases with unifying features of progressive cognitive and motor decline, and increased iron deposition in the basal ganglia. Although at present there are no proven disease-modifying treatments, the severe nature of these monogenic disorders lends to consideration of personalized medicine strategies, including targeted gene therapy. In this review we summarize the progress and future direction towards precision therapies for NBIA disorders.<h4>Methods</h4>This review considered all relevant publications up to April 2021 using a systematic search strategy of PubMed and clinical trials databases.<h4>Results</h4>We review what is currently known about the underlying pathophysiology of NBIA disorders, common NBIA disease pathways, and how this knowledge has influenced current management strategies and clinical trial design. The safety profile, efficacy and clinical outcome of clinical studies are reviewed. Furthermore, the potential for future therapeutic approaches is also discussed.<h4>Discussion</h4>Therapeutic options in NBIAs remain very limited, with no proven disease-modifying treatments at present. However, a number of different approaches are currently under development with increasing focus on targeted precision therapies. Recent advances in the field give hope that novel strategies, such as gene therapy, gene editing and substrate replacement therapies are both scientifically and financially feasible for these conditions.<h4>Highlights</h4>This article provides an up-to-date review of the current literature about Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA), with a focus on disease pathophysiology, current and previously trialed therapies, and future treatments in development, including consideration of potential genetic therapy approaches.

[9] Jaberi-Elahi syndrome: Exploring a novel GTPBP2 mutation and a literature review
    J Manoochehri, A Shiri, S Khoddam… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1769721224000454
    snippet: … a novel homozygous variant in GTPBP2 and a phenotype overlapping with Jaberi-Elahi … , characterized by the accumulation of iron in the basal ganglia. Iron accumulation in the brain …
    abstract: Jaberi-Elahi syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disease caused by pathogenic variants in GTPBP2. The core symptoms of this disease are intellectual disability, motor development delay, abnormal reflexes, skeletal abnormalities, and visual impairment. In this study, we describe a three-year-old girl with a novel homozygous variant in GTPBP2 and a phenotype overlapping with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. This variant (NM_019096.5:c.1289T > C, p.Leu430Pro) was identified by Whole Exome Sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing although remains classified as VUS based on ACMG criteria. The proband demonstrated motor and intellectual developmental delay, muscle weakness, language disorder, facial dysmorphism, and poor growth. Hitherto, twenty-seven individuals with Jaberi-Elahi syndrome have been reported in the literature. This study, describes a review of the symptoms related to the Jaberi-Elahi syndrome. A large numbers of patients manifest motor development delay (26/28), sparse hair (26/28), and speech disorder (24/28). Moreover, a significant fraction of patients suffer from intellectual disability (23/28), hypotonia (23/28), skeletal problems (23/28), and visual impairment (18/28). In spite of previous patients, the proband in this study did not exhibit any skeletal abnormalities. In summary, we present evidence implicating a novel missense variant in Jaberi-Elahi syndrome, expanding and refining the genetic spectrum of this condition.

[10] Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and a brief report of the disease in Iran
    R Hajati, M Emamikhah, FD Fard… (2022)
    https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/canadian-journal-of-neurological-sciences/article/neurodegeneration-with-brain-iron-accumulation-and-a-brief-report-of-the-disease-in-iran/F1086EF553402CA967D7E406A870BCB4
    snippet: … disorders with abnormal accumulation of iron in basal ganglia. It is … gènes liés à la NBIA, le GTPBP2, a été identifié dans une … Recently, Jaberi and colleagues reported an Iranian family …
    abstract: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a term used for a group of hereditary neurological disorders with abnormal accumulation of iron in basal ganglia. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with symptoms such as dystonia, dysarthria, Parkinsonism, intellectual disability, and spasticity. The age at onset and rate of progression are variable among individuals. Current therapies are exclusively symptomatic and unable to hinder the disease progression. Approximately 16 genes have been identified and affiliated to such condition with different functions such as iron metabolism (only two genes: Ferritin Light Chain (FTL) Ceruloplasmin (CP)), lipid metabolism, lysosomal functions, and autophagy process, but some functions have remained unknown so far. Subgroups of NBIA are categorized based on the mutant genes. Although in the last 10 years, the development of whole-exome sequencing (WES) technology has promoted the identification of disease-causing genes, there seem to be some unknown genes and our knowledge about the molecular aspects and pathogenesis of NBIA is not complete yet. There is currently no comprehensive study about the NBIA in Iran; however, one of the latest discovered NBIA genes, GTP-binding protein 2 (GTPBP2), has been identified in an Iranian family, and there are some patients who have genetically remained unknown.