SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A clinical approach to the diagnosis of patients with leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephelopathies
    S Parikh, G Bernard, RJ Leventer… (2015)
    PMID:25655951 DOI:10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.12.434 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1096719214008270
    snippet: … in patients with 4H leukodystrophy (Hypomyelination, hypodontia and hypogonadotropic … Hypomyelination is defined as an unchanged pattern of deficient myelination on two MRI scans …
    abstract: Leukodystrophies (LD) and genetic leukoencephalopathies (gLE) are disorders that result in white matter abnormalities in the central nervous system (CNS). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging (MRI) has dramatically improved and systematized the diagnosis of LDs and gLEs, and in combination with specific clinical features, such as Addison's disease in Adrenoleukodystrophy or hypodontia in Pol-III related or 4H leukodystrophy, can often resolve a case with a minimum of testing. The diagnostic odyssey for the majority LD and gLE patients, however, remains extensive--many patients will wait nearly a decade for a definitive diagnosis and at least half will remain unresolved. The combination of MRI, careful clinical evaluation and next generation genetic sequencing holds promise for both expediting the diagnostic process and dramatically reducing the number of unresolved cases. Here we present a workflow detailing the Global Leukodystrophy Initiative (GLIA) consensus recommendations for an approach to clinical diagnosis, including salient clinical features suggesting a specific diagnosis, neuroimaging features and molecular genetic testing. We also discuss recommendations on the use of broad-spectrum next-generation sequencing in instances of ambiguous MRI or clinical findings. We conclude with a proposal for systematic trials of genome-wide agnostic testing as a first line diagnostic in LDs and gLEs given the increasing number of genes associated with these disorders.

[2] Solving the hypomyelination conundrum-Imaging perspectives
    P Malik, K Muthusamy, K Mankad, M Shroff… (2020)
    PMID:32418752 DOI:10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.04.007 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090379820300787
    snippet: … hypomyelination’ has been adopted to imply reduced myelin content due to abnormal development and structure of myelin, in contrast to other leukodystrophies … other leukodystrophies …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophies (HLDs) are a genetically heterogeneous, clinically overlapping group of disorders with the unifying MR imaging appearance of myelin deficit in the brain. In fact, it is the MRI phenotype that typically raises the diagnostic suspicion in this single largest group of undiagnosed leukodystrophies and guides gene testing for confirmation. This article reviews the neurobiology of myelination, focussing on the complex interplay of molecular genetic pathways and presents a practical clinico-radiological diagnostic algorithm based on the neuroimaging patterns of the common hypomyelinating disorders. The authors also address the current controversies about the definition and use of the term 'hypomyelination'.

[3] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies—a molecular insight into the white matter pathology
    A Charzewska, J Wierzba… (2016)
    PMID:27234264 DOI:10.1111/cge.12811 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.12811
    snippet: … PMD used to be defined as oligodendrocyte disorder manifesting with diffuse hypomyelination on MRI (homogeneous hypointensity in T1-weighted images, and hyperintensity in T2-). …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental disorders that affect proper formation of the myelin sheath in the central nervous system. They are characterized by developmental delay, hypotonia, spasticity, and variable intellectual disability. In the past various classification systems for HLDs have been used, based on imaging findings, clinical manifestation, and organelle-specific disorders. Here we present a molecular insight into HLDs based on a defect in specific gene engaged in myelination. We discuss recent findings on pathogenesis, clinical presentation, and imaging related to these disorders. We focus on HLDs that are in use in differential diagnostics of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD), with a special emphasis on Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS), an X-linked condition with delayed myelination due to thyroid transport disturbances. On the background of previously published patients we describe a proband initially considered as presenting with a severe PMD, whose diagnosis of AHDS due to a novel nonsense SLC16A2 mutation unraveled two previously undiagnosed generations of affected males who died in infancy from unexplained reasons. Since AHDS is found to be a relatively frequent cause of X-linked intellectual disability, we emphasize the need for determining the whole thyroid profile especially in hypotonic males with a delay of psychomotor development.

[4] Magnetic resonance imaging in leukodystrophies: characteristic patterns and diagnostic relevance
    M de Lima Ruffini, D de Assis Pereira… (2026)
    PMID:42468917 DOI:10.1055/s-0046-1824758 PMC13379286 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13379286/
    snippet: … The pivotal imaging distinction is between hypomyelination—diffuse, persistent T2/FLAIR hyperintensity with relative temporal stability and absent enhancement—and demyelination, …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Leukodystrophies are inherited disorders that primarily affect the central nervous system white matter and often present with nonspecific symptoms, making early diagnosis difficult. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the key initial imaging test because it reveals characteristic myelin patterns that can guide biochemical and genetic workups.<h4>Objective</h4>To review clinically useful MRI and MR spectroscopy (MRS) patterns in major leukodystrophies and emphasize their diagnostic relevance using a practical, pattern-recognition approach.<h4>Methods</h4>Narrative review of the literature integrating conventional MRI, including T1/T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), as well as advanced techniques (MRS), with a pictorial, case-based approach.<h4>Results</h4>The pivotal imaging distinction is between hypomyelination-diffuse, persistent T2/FLAIR hyperintensity with relative temporal stability and absent enhancement-and demyelination, characterized by confluent, progressive lesions with disorder-specific topographic predilection. Recognizable signatures include U-fiber sparing and a tigroid pattern in metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD); parieto-occipital predominance with trizonal enhancement and restricted diffusion in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD); frontal predominance and the "tadpole sign" in Alexander's disease; optic pathway and thalamic involvement in Krabbe's disease; markedly elevated N-acetylaspartate (NAA) on MRS in Canavan's disease; and tract-selective leukoencephalopathy brainstem/spinal cord involvement with a lactate peak (LBSL). These imaging clues refine differential diagnosis, guide targeted genetic testing, and support longitudinal monitoring.<h4>Conclusion</h4>The use of MRI-especially when complemented by DWI and MRS-remains central for early recognition and classification of leukodystrophies. A structured, pattern-based approach integrating clinical context with imaging topography can reduce diagnostic delay and support timely management.

[5] Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies: translational research progress and prospects
    PJW Pouwels, A Vanderver, G Bernard… (2014)
    PMID:24916848 DOI:10.1002/ana.24194 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ana.24194
    snippet: … leukodystrophy include use of serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to establish and monitor hypomyelination, … leukodystrophies, and the insights that can be obtained from current …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies represent a genetically heterogeneous but clinically overlapping group of heritable disorders. Current management approaches in the care of the patient with a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy include use of serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to establish and monitor hypomyelination, molecular diagnostics to determine a specific etiology, and equally importantly, careful attention to neurologic complications over time. Emerging research in oligodendrocyte biology and neuroradiology with bedside applications may result in the possibility of clinical trials in the near term, yet there are significant gaps in knowledge in disease classification, characterization, and outcome measures in this group of disorders. Here we review the biological background of myelination, the clinical and genetic variability in hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, and the insights that can be obtained from current MRI techniques. In addition, we discuss ongoing research approaches to define potential outcome markers for future clinical trials.

[6] Magnetic resonance imaging pattern recognition in ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41585513 DOI:10.3389/fvets.2025.1753492 PMC3589901 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3589901/
    snippet: by ME Steenweg · 2010 · Cited by 341 — All MRI scans available to us: (i) fulfilling the definition of hypomyelination as given in the introduction; and (ii) with a known cause for the disease, were ...
    abstract: [This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2024.1390971.].

[7] Handout Sixth Joint Webinar Hypomyelination NIW
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ern-rnd.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/ERN-RND-Joint-Webinar-2020-Hypomyelination-NIW.pdf
    snippet: ➢ Definition of hypomyelination. ➢ Different MRI patterns in hypomyelination. ➢ What kind of proteins are involved in hypomyelination ...

[8] Leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies in ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38277958 DOI:10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.12.027 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0035378718308336
    snippet: by C Sarret · 2020 · Cited by 24 — Vanderver et al. Case definition and classification of leukodystrophies and leukoencephalopathies ... hypomyelination and leukodystrophy. Am J Hum Genet. (2008).
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>White matter (WM) disorders with a genetic etiology are classified as leukodystrophies (LDs) and genetic leukoencephalopathies (GLEs). There are very few studies pertaining to the etiologic spectrum of these disorders in the Asian Indian population.<h4>Methods</h4>This study was conducted over a period of five years from January 2016 to December 2020, in the medical genetics department of a tertiary care hospital in southern India. A total of 107 patients up to age 18 years, with a diagnosis of a genetic WM disorder confirmed by molecular genetic testing and/or metabolic testing, were included in the study and categorized into LD or GLE group as per the classification suggested by the Global Leukodystrophy Initiative consortium in 2015.<h4>Results</h4>Forty-one patients were diagnosed to have LDs, and 66 patients had GLEs. The two most common LDs were metachromatic LD (16 patients) and X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (seven patients). In the GLE group, lysosomal storage disorders were the most common (40 patients) followed by mitochondrial disorders (nine patients), with other metabolic disorders and miscellaneous conditions making up the rest. The clinical presentations, neuroimaging findings, and mutation spectrum of the patients in our cohort are discussed.<h4>Conclusions</h4>This is one of the largest cohorts of genetic WM disorders reported till date from the Asian Indian population. The etiologies and clinical presentations identified in our study cohort are similar to those found in other Indian studies as well as in studies based on other populations from different parts of the world.

[9] Leukodystrophy (Concept Id: C0023520)
    (authors not shown)
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/6070
    snippet: Definition. Leukodystrophy refers to deterioration of white matter of the ... Brain imaging typically shows hypomyelination, leukodystrophy, and thin ...

[10] Leukodystrophies in Children: Diagnosis, Care, and ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:34426533 DOI:10.1542/peds.2021-053126 https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/148/3/e2021053126/181065/Leukodystrophies-in-Children-Diagnosis-Care-and
    snippet: ... definition of a leukodystrophy and whether certain conditions meet required criteria. ... diagnosis of hypomyelination.16. Despite these ...
    abstract: Leukodystrophies are a group of genetically determined disorders that affect development or maintenance of central nervous system myelin. Leukodystrophies have an incidence of at least 1 in 4700 live births and significant morbidity and elevated risk of early death. This report includes a discussion of the types of leukodystrophies; their prevalence, clinical presentation, symptoms, and diagnosis; and current and future treatments. Leukodystrophies can present at any age from infancy to adulthood, with variability in disease progression and clinical presentation, ranging from developmental delay to seizures to spasticity. Diagnosis is based on a combination of history, examination, and radiologic and laboratory findings, including genetic testing. Although there are few cures, there are significant opportunities for care and improvements in patient well-being. Rapid advances in imaging and diagnosis, the emergence of and requirement for timely treatments, and the addition of leukodystrophy screening to newborn screening, make an understanding of the leukodystrophies necessary for pediatricians and other care providers for children.