SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Cornelia de Lange syndrome as paradigm of chromatinopathies
    I Parenti, FJ Kaiser (2021)
    DOI:10.3389/fnins.2021.774950/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2021.774950/full
    snippet: Chromatinopathies can be defined as a class of neurodevelopmental disorders caused by mutations affecting proteins responsible for chromatin remodeling and transcriptional regulation. The resulting dysregulation of gene expression favors the onset of a series of clinical features such as developmental delay, intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism, and behavioral disturbances. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a prime example of a chromatinopathy. It is caused by mutations affecting subunits or regulators of the cohesin …

[2] CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME AND RELATED DISORDERS: NEW INSIGHTS INTO GLOBAL TRANSCRIPTIONAL DISTURBANCES DUE TO MUTATIONS IN …
    I Parenti (2016)
    https://tesidottorato.depositolegale.it/handle/20.500.14242/75793
    snippet: Abstract Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare disorder characterized by an extensive clinical heterogeneity. The main features of the syndrome are characteristic facial dysmorphisms and a variable level of intellectual disability, growth retardation and developmental delay. Though, the number and severity of the clinical signs vary among patients. An extensive genetic heterogeneity partially accounts for the reported clinical variability. Mutations in different cohesin-associated proteins are in fact responsible for the …

[3] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: by I Parenti · 2026 · Cited by 3 — While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[4] Clinical study and genetic analysis of Cornelia de Lange ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10767608 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10767608/
    snippet: by Y Peng · 2023 · Cited by 6 — Thus far, only one case of CdLS caused by a MAU2 variant has been reported worldwide (Parenti et al., 2020). ... CdLS, Cornelia de Lange syndrome; ...
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is mainly characterized by specific facial features, growth retardation, and bone deformities. Seven genes reportedly cause CdLS. Recent research has reported that loss-of-function variants affecting MAU2, which encodes a regulator of the cohesin complex, can cause CdLS. Thus far, only one MAU2-CdLS case has been reported worldwide.<h4>Methods</h4>We detected a novel variant in MAU2 gene, NM_015329, c.526C>T (p.Arg176Trp) in a Chinese patient with CdLS, constructed a plasmid for in vitro transcriptional and protein level analysis, and analyzed the interaction between the MAU2/NIPBL complex using molecular dynamics (MD).<h4>Results</h4>The results showed that the level of the exogenous MAU2 mutant protein was significantly reduced compared with that of the exogenous wild-type protein. However, MD analysis predicted an increased binding free energy between the MAU2 and NIPBL proteins that may impact the structural stability of the complex.<h4>Conclusion</h4>We investigated a MAU2-CdLS case in a Chinese family, which strengthens the association between MAU2 variants and CdLS phenotypes. We therefore propose that MAU2 be included in the CdLS gene screening list.

[5] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/2025.11.16.25339042v1 https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.11.16.25339042v1
    snippet: While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals ...

[6] MAU2 and NIPBL Variants Impair the Heterodimerization of ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://univ-rennes.hal.science/hal-02862830
    snippet: by I Parenti · 2020 · Cited by 79 — MAU2 and NIPBL Variants Impair the Heterodimerization of the Cohesin Loader Subunits and Cause Cornelia de Lange Syndrome. I. Parenti (1, 2) , F. Diab (3) ...
    abstract: The NIPBL/MAU2 heterodimer loads cohesin onto chromatin. Mutations in NIPBL account for most cases of the rare developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Here we report a MAU2 variant causing CdLS, a deletion of seven amino acids that impairs the interaction between MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus. Investigating this interaction, we discovered that MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus are largely dispensable for normal cohesin and NIPBL function in cells with a NIPBL early truncating mutation. Despite a predicted fatal outcome of an out-of-frame single nucleotide duplication in NIPBL, engineered in two different cell lines, alternative translation initiation yields a form of NIPBL missing N-terminal residues. This form cannot interact with MAU2, but binds DNA and mediates cohesin loading. Altogether, our work reveals that cohesin loading can occur independently of functional NIPBL/MAU2 complexes and highlights a novel mechanism protective against out-of-frame mutations that is potentially relevant for other genetic conditions.

[7] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8223&context=papers
    snippet: Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype. Ilaria Parenti. Alina Hesters.
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[8] Advancing the clinical and molecular understanding of cornelia de lange syndrome: A multidisciplinary pediatric case series and review of the literature
    K Gruca (2024)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: … Thanks to follow-up, we know that GERD is one of the main … MAU2 interacts with the cohesin ring in the closed state, and … phenotype suggest a high likelihood of Cornelia de Lange …

[9] MAU2 and NIPBL variants impair the heterodimerization of the cohesin loader subunits and cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    I Parenti, F Diab, SR Gil, E Mulugeta, V Casa, R Berutti… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/cell-reports/fulltext/S2211-1247(20)30600-8
    snippet: … Here we describe the first genetic variant in MAU2 causing a CdLS phenotype. The … He developed very early gastresophageal reflux disease. Magnetic Resonance Imaging revealed …
    abstract: The NIPBL/MAU2 heterodimer loads cohesin onto chromatin. Mutations in NIPBL account for most cases of the rare developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Here we report a MAU2 variant causing CdLS, a deletion of seven amino acids that impairs the interaction between MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus. Investigating this interaction, we discovered that MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus are largely dispensable for normal cohesin and NIPBL function in cells with a NIPBL early truncating mutation. Despite a predicted fatal outcome of an out-of-frame single nucleotide duplication in NIPBL, engineered in two different cell lines, alternative translation initiation yields a form of NIPBL missing N-terminal residues. This form cannot interact with MAU2, but binds DNA and mediates cohesin loading. Altogether, our work reveals that cohesin loading can occur independently of functional NIPBL/MAU2 complexes and highlights a novel mechanism protective against out-of-frame mutations that is potentially relevant for other genetic conditions.

[10] Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    MI Boyle, C Jespersgaard, K Brøndum‐Nielsen… (2015)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.12499 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.12499
    snippet: … B-like protein) and MAU2 (MAU2 sister chromatid cohesion factor)… Gastroesophageal reflux and Cornelia de Lange syndrome: … heart disease in Cornelia de Lange syndrome: phenotype …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; MIM #122470, 300590, 610759, 614701, 300882) is a rare and clinically variable disorder that affects multiple organs. It is characterized by intellectual disability (mild to severe), distinctive facial features, prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, and hirsutism. Congenital anomalies include malformations of the upper limbs, gastrointestinal malformation/rotation, pyloric stenosis, diaphragmatic hernia, heart defects and genitourinary malformations. Gastroesophageal reflux disease is present in almost all patients. In addition to classic forms, milder phenotypes have been reported. To date five genes [NIPBL (Nipped-B-like protein), SMC1A (structural maintenance of chromosomes 1A), SMC3 (structural maintenance of chromosomes 3), RAD21 (human homolog of Schizosaccharomyces pombe radiation sensitive mutant 21) and HDAC8 (histone deacetylase 8)] have been associated with CdLS and mutations of these genes comprise the underlying defect in 70% of the patients. Here, we will provide a brief review of the clinical features of CdLS, summarize the known underlying genetic defects, prenatal and postnatal diagnosis possibilities, and genetic counseling.