SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 encodes a member of the MSL complex, an epigenetic regulator … identify MSL2 variants leading to a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability, developmental delay, …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] MSL2 disruption leads to autism-like behaviors, impairs neurogenesis, and alters histone H4K16 acetylation
    S Luo, S Qu, S Tan, Z Song, Y Lv, X Jia, J Tan… (2026)
    DOI:10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00018-026-06237-7_reference.pdf
    snippet: … ) variants in MSL2 have been linked to developmental delay (DD) … that MSL2 variants lead to a new neurodevelopmental … patients with MSL2 variants exhibit intellectual disability, we …

[3] Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
    X Lu, K Ng, F Pinto e Vairo, J Collins, R Cohn… (2024)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-024-01576-0
    snippet: … The clinical features associated with MSL2 and MSL3 pathogenic variants overlap. These include the developmental delay, intellectual disability, ASD, hypotonia, epicanthal folds, low …
    abstract: Numerous large scale genomic studies have uncovered rare but recurrent pathogenetic variants in a significant number of genes encoding epigenetic machinery in cases with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) especially autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These findings provide strong support for the functional importance of epigenetic regulators in neurodevelopment. After the clinical genomics evaluation of the patients using exome sequencing, we have identified, three novel protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the MSL2 gene (OMIM: 614802) which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme. MSL2 modifies chromatin through both mono-ubiquitination of histone 2B on lysine 34 (K34) and acetylation of histone H4 on lysine 16 (K16). We reported first time the detailed clinical features associated with 3 MSL2 PTVs. There are 15 PTVs (13 de novo) reported from the large genomics studies (12 cases) or ClinVar (3 cases) of NDD, ASD, and developmental disorders (DD) but the specific clinical features for these cases are not described. Taken together, our descriptions of dysmorphic face and other features support the causal role of MSL2 in a likely syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder and add MSL2 to a growing list of epigenetic genes implicated in ASD.

[4] Lysine acetyltransferase 8 is involved in cerebral development and syndromic intellectual disability
    L Li, M Ghorbani, M Weisz (2020)
    https://www.jci.org/articles/view/131145
    snippet: … Moreover, we describe KAT8 variants in 9 patients with intellectual disability, seizures, autism, … acylation directly to intellectual disability, epilepsy, and other developmental anomalies. …

[5] Homozygous Deletion of the Epigenetic Regulator PHF20 in Individuals With Neurodevelopmental Disorder
    SY Dagan, H Xuan, J Rips, E Paz (2025)
    DOI:10.1155/humu/6484814 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/humu/6484814
    snippet: … neurodevelopmental syndrome (MIM 620985), associated with developmental delay, intellectual disability… in iPSCs with MSL2 variants, although expression of MSL2 targets was altered …
    abstract: <i>PHF20</i> encodes plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20), a component of the KAT8-containing nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex that deposits acetylation on histone H4 to activate gene expression. We report two unrelated individuals with developmental delay, microcephaly, and distinctive facial features, in whom exome sequencing and chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> that segregated with the disease phenotype in their families. Breakpoint junction sequencing revealed an <i>Alu-Alu</i>-mediated deletion event. Western blot in cells from an affected individual showed undetectable PHF20, while levels of other NSL complex subunits were unaltered. Transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis revealed significant downregulation of gene pathways related to cell projection and neuronal development, associated with reduced histone H4K16 acetylation at these genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that homozygous deletion of <i>PHF20</i> leads to a neurodevelopmental syndrome, potentially through targeted epigenetic dysregulation and altered gene expression essential for neuronal development. Identifying additional families with biallelic <i>PHF20</i> variants will further delineate the phenotypic spectrum, and molecular studies in neuronal cell lines will be essential for understanding the disease mechanism.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38815585/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — ... neurodevelopmental ... MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929724001642
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Understanding the Impact of MSL2 Variants on ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://tinyeye.com/blog/understanding-the-impact-of-msl2-variants-on-neurodevelopmental-disorders-a-guide-for-practitioners.php
    snippet: Understanding the Impact of MSL2 Variants on Neurodevelopmental ... These variants are linked to NDD phenotypes such as global developmental delay, intellectual ...

[9] MSL2 (Intellectual disability) - Gene
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/285/gene/MSL2/
    snippet: Recent publications supports that MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia ...

[10] The evolving landscape of functional models of autism spectrum disorder
    J Ranjan, A Bhattacharya (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4409/14/12/908
    snippet: … like intellectual disability (ID), attention deficit hyperactivity … MSL2 Biallelic expression of dosage sensitive genes, histone … lethality Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas NDD syndrome Multiple …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1-3% of the population globally. Owing to its multifactorial origin, complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to faithfully model ASD. In essence, ASD is an umbrella term for a group of individually rare disorders, each risk gene accounting for <1% of cases, threaded by a set of overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral tests are considered a gold standard for ASD diagnosis, and several animal models (rodents, pigs, and non-human primates) have traditionally been used to study its molecular basis. These models recapitulate the human phenotype to a varying degree and have been indispensable to preclinical research, but they cannot be used to study human-specific features such as protracted neuronal maturation and cell-intrinsic attributes, posing serious limitations to translatability. Human stem cell-based models, both as monolayer 2D cultures and 3D organoids and assembloids, can circumvent these limitations. Generated from a patient's own reprogrammed cells, these can be used for testing therapeutic interventions that are more condition and patient relevant, targeting developmental windows where the intervention would be most effective. We discuss some of these advancements by comparing traditional and recent models of ASD.