SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Genetic enhancement of limb defects in a mouse model of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    ME Lopez‐Burks, R Santos, S Kawauchi… (2016)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.c.31491 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.c.31491
    snippet: … NIPBL mutational analysis in 120 individuals with Cornelia de Lange syndrome and evaluation of genotype-phenotype correlations. Am J Hum Genet 75:610–623. Goldman DC, …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is characterized by a wide variety of structural and functional abnormalities in almost every organ system of the body. CdLS is now known to be caused by mutations that disrupt the function of the cohesin complex or its regulators, and studies of animal models and cell lines tell us that the effect of these mutations is to produce subtle yet pervasive dysregulation of gene expression. With many hundreds of mostly small gene expression changes occurring in every cell type and tissue, identifying the etiology of any particular birth defect is very challenging. Here we focus on limb abnormalities, which are commonly seen in CdLS. In the limb buds of the Nipbl-haploinsufficient mouse (Nipbl(+/-) mouse), a model for the most common form of CdLS, modest gene expression changes are observed in several candidate pathways whose disruption is known to cause limb abnormalities, yet the limbs of Nipbl(+/-) mice develop relatively normally. We hypothesized that further impairment of candidate pathways might produce limb defects similar to those seen in CdLS, and performed genetic experiments to test this. Focusing on Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp), and Hox gene pathways, we show that decreasing Bmp or Hox function (but not Shh function) enhances polydactyly in Nipbl(+/-) mice, and in some cases produces novel skeletal phenotypes. However, frank limb reductions, as are seen in a subset of individuals with CdLS, do not occur, suggesting that additional signaling and/or gene regulatory pathways are involved in producing such dramatic changes. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[2] Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction
    D Braunholz, M Hullings, MC Gil (2012)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/ejhg2011175
    snippet: … with normal MAU2 binding have heart defects ranging from … in this report have severe limb anomalies and tend to trend … of cardiac defects, we did not detect a significant phenotypic …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; or Brachmann-de Lange syndrome) is a dominantly inherited congenital malformation disorder with features that include characteristic facies, cognitive delays, growth retardation and limb anomalies. Mutations in nearly 60% of CdLS patients have been identified in NIPBL, which encodes a regulator of the sister chromatid cohesion complex. NIPBL, also known as delangin, is a homolog of yeast and amphibian Scc2 and C. elegans PQN-85. Although the exact mechanism of NIPBL function in sister chromatid cohesion is unclear, in vivo yeast and C. elegans experiments and in vitro vertebrate cell experiments have demonstrated that NIPBL/Scc2 functionally interacts with the MAU2/Scc4 protein to initiate loading of cohesin onto chromatin. To test the significance of this model in the clinical setting of CdLS, we fine-mapped the NIBPL-MAU2 interaction domain and tested the functional significance of missense mutations and variants in NIPBL and MAU2 identified in these minimal domains in a cohort of patients with CdLS. We demonstrate that specific novel mutations at the N-terminus of the MAU2-interacting domain of NIBPL result in markedly reduced MAU2 binding, although we appreciate no consistent clinical difference in the small group of patients with these mutations. These data suggest that factors in addition to MAU2 are essential in determining the clinical features and severity of CdLS.

[3] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: … cohort and assess the molecular and phenotypic consequences of MAU2 variants. Our findings … , and neurodevelopmental defects that closely parallel human CdLS phenotypes33,34. …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[4] Cornelia de Lange spectrum
    Á Ascaso, M Arnedo, B Puisac… (2024)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2341287924001388
    snippet: … of additional genes (BRD4, ANKRD11, MAU2), but the lack of … who presented with very similar phenotypes. She called the … Facial features and limb abnormalities in patients with CdLS …
    abstract: The cohesin complex plays crucial roles in DNA repair, chromatid separation, and gene transcription regulation. Pathogenic variants in cohesins or dysfunctional transcriptional regulators lead to cohesinopathies, a broader group of disorders including Cornelia de Lange Spectrum (CdLSp), for which the prevalence of cancer cases remains unclear. Here, we aimed to assess the prevalence of oncological events in CdLSp and elucidate the role of cohesin variants in cancer predisposition. We developed a custom next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel targeting predisposition and pathogenic genes, which we applied on N = 120 samples of pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), identifying 11 out of 229 total-10 germline and 1 somatic-variants in cohesin genes. Data of N = 205 brain tumors were extracted by bioinformatic analysis of data from open-source databases carrying 19 somatic variants. In a cohort of 54 CdLSp patients, the largest cohort from a single center, with a median age of 13 years, the hypothesis of an increased prevalence of cancer in CdLSp was not confirmed. Our findings highlight a significant involvement of germline NIPBL variants in CdLSp, whereas RAD21 and STAG1/2 are predominantly found as somatic variants in neoplasms. However, a distinct genetic or molecular pattern distinguishing variants leading to CdLSp from tumors was not identified. Hence, we advocate for further investigation into the relationship between cohesin variants and cancer predisposition in a larger cohort of patients, with a longer observation time and including different types of malignancies, with more focus on epigenetic approaches.

[5] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 lead to a new Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2025)
    PMC12668068 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12668068/
    snippet: … cohort and assess the molecular and phenotypic consequences of MAU2 variants. Our findings … , and neurodevelopmental defects that closely parallel human CdLS phenotypes 31, 32 . …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While  NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of  MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous  MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. MAU2 in-frame variants predominantly impair NIPBL–MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause  MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most patients exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also identified two  MAU2 -specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features. A heterozygous  Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulated these traits, confirming the causal role of  MAU2 disruption  in vivo. Our study establishes  MAU2 as a new CdLS-associated gene and delineates a  MAU2 -related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[6] Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - GeneReviews - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1104/
    snippet: by MA Deardorff · 2020 · Cited by 188 — BRD4-, MAU2-, NIPBL-, RAD21-, and SMC3-related Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) are autosomal dominant disorders typically caused by a de novo ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[7] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8223&context=papers
    snippet: Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity. Cornelia de Lange ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[8] MAU2 and NIPBL variants in Cornelia de Lange syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/477752v1.full-text https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/477752v1.full-text
    snippet: MAU2 and NIPBL variants in Cornelia de Lange syndrome reveal MAU2-independent loading of cohesin and uncover a protective mechanism against ...

[9] Cornelia De Lange Syndrome
    (authors not shown)
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/942792-overview
    snippet: Additional genes have been found to cause CdLS or CdLS-like phenotypes, including BRD4, ANKRD11, MAU2, and EP300. ... Cornelia de Lange syndrome ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) encompasses a spectrum of findings from mild to severe. Severe (classic) CdLS is characterized by distinctive facial features, growth failure (often prenatal onset; height and weight <5th centile throughout life), hypertrichosis, and limb abnormalities (e.g., complete absence of elbow and forearms, oligodactyly [missing digits], micromelia [small hands], subtle phalangeal abnormalities). Craniofacial features include synophrys, highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, short nose with depressed nasal bridge and anteverted nares, small, widely spaced teeth, and microbrachycephaly. Individuals with a milder phenotype have less severe growth, cognitive, and limb involvement, but often have facial features consistent with CdLS. Across the CdLS spectrum, IQ ranges from below 30 to 102 (mean: 53). Many individuals demonstrate autistic and self-injurious behaviors. Other frequent findings include gastrointestinal dysfunction, cryptorchidism or hypoplastic genitalia, myopia, hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of CdLS is established in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BRD4, MAU2, NIPBL, RAD21, or SMC3 or a hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in HDAC8 or SMC1A identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Use of CdLS-specific growth charts with supplementary formulas and/or gastrostomy tube placement to meet nutritional needs as necessary. Aggressive management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with assessment of potential gastrointestinal malrotation; consideration of fundoplication if reflux is severe. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy to optimize psychomotor development and communication skills. Aggressive treatment of nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Standard treatment for epilepsy, limb defects, gastrointestinal malformations, ocular issues, hearing loss, cleft palate, dental anomalies, cryptorchidism/hypospadias, bicornuate uterus, vesicoureteral reflux, cardiac defects, immunodeficiency, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. If surgery is being considered, preoperative evaluation for thrombocytopenia and cardiac disease with careful monitoring of the airway during anesthesia are recommended. Family and social work support. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safet

[10] Advancing the clinical and molecular understanding of cornelia de lange syndrome: A multidisciplinary pediatric case series and review of the literature
    K Gruca (2024)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2423
    snippet: … It has been noted that the disease caused by MAU2 mutation … the clinical complexity of Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS… the syndrome’s spectrum, which includes limb malformations, …