SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … These include brain malformations such as periventricular heterotopia in addition to … with variable congenital neurological symptoms including brain malformations and a neuromuscular …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[2] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … which can be attributed to FILIP1, and the imprinting disorder … with the neuromuscular phenotype of FILIP1-associated … report brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay and …

[3] Myofibrillar myopathy: towards a mechanism-based definition as a Z-disk-opathy
    M Inoue, CC Weihl (2025)
    PMC12354002 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12354002/
    snippet: … , brain malformations and seizures. The phenotype reflects a combined neuromuscular and … identifies biallelic FILIP1 variants as a cause of a novel syndromic congenital myopathy, …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose of review</h4>Myofibrillar myopathies (MFMs) are traditionally defined by histopathology, but recent genetic discoveries have broadened the spectrum of causative genes beyond Z-disk components. This review aims to address the resulting terminological inconsistency by proposing a refined, mechanism-based definition of MFM centered on its identity as a "Z-disk-opathy." This re-evaluation is timely and relevant for improving diagnostic clarity and guiding future research.<h4>Recent findings</h4>The literature increasingly reports MFM-like pathology in conditions caused by mutations in genes not directly encoding Z-disk structural proteins or their interacting chaperones. This review highlights the pathogenic mechanisms distinguishing true MFMs, which involve disruption of Z-disk protein structure or Z-disk protein homeostasis, from "myopathies with MFM pathology" that share histological features but stem from different molecular etiologies. Key themes include the dominant nature of mutations in Z-disk structural proteins and the critical role of chaperone dysfunction in MFM pathogenesis.<h4>Summary</h4>A refined definition classifying MFM as a "Z-disk-opathy" offers a clearer framework for diagnosis and mechanistic understanding. This distinction has significant implications for clinical practice, facilitating more accurate diagnosis, and for research, by supporting the development of targeted therapeutic strategies aimed at either restoring Z-disk proteostasis or mitigating the effects of aberrant protein accumulation.

[4] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … reported in lethal congenital phenotypes with generalized contractures [150]. More recently, FILIP1 loss-… by early fetal onset with profound brain malformations, severe ocular anomalies, …

[5] INV10 Genetic discovery and pathomechanisms of repeat disorders in neuromuscular diseases: lessons from RFC1
    H Houlden (2023)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960896623004364
    snippet: … FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, … that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a …

[6] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37163662/
    snippet: by A Roos · 2023 · Cited by 10 — Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital ... Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, ...
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[7] New Publication: Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://lochmullerlab.org/news/new-publication-bi-allelic-variants-of-filip1-cause-congenital-myopathy-dysmorphism-and-neurological-defects/
    snippet: Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital ... Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, ...

[8] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy ... - PMC
    (authors not shown)
    PMC10545528 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10545528/
    snippet: by A Roos · 2023 · Cited by 10 — ... FILIP1 as a novel gene for neurological and neuromuscular ... congenital neurological symptoms including brain malformations and a neuromuscular disorder.
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[9] KEGG Disease
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.kegg.jp/kegg-bin/search?search_gene=1&display=disease&from=disease&q=filip1
    snippet: Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental ... Congenital malformation, FILIP1 [HSA:27145] [KO ...

[10] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … tests, brain imaging, and chromosomal microarray were … are elbow contracture, camptodactyly and feet anomalies such as … In summary, we provide clinical and genetic evidence that bi-…
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.