SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … MSL2 encodes a member of the MSL complex, an epigenetic regulator acetylating histone H4. We identify MSL2 variants leading to a neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Thickened Nuchal Translucency, Lymphangioma, and Ventriculomegaly: Prenatal Phenotypes for MSL2‐Related Disorders
    Q Xiang, J Wang, M Yang (2026)
    PMC13446537 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13446537/
    snippet: … In conclusion, this case expands the prenatal phenotypic spectrum of MSL2‐related developmental disorder and suggests that exome sequencing should be considered for fetuses …

[3] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in Association With an Inherited 15q13 Microduplication
    O Zgheib, T Rio Frio, JM Pellegrinelli, S Gimelli… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: … (Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas neurodevelopmental syndrome, OMIM 620985). MSL2 codes for … MSL2 is thought to ensure biallelic gene expression in mammals, and reported variants …
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[4] Chromosome 3q22. 2‐q26. 2 Interstitial Deletion in a Patient With Wisconsin Syndrome, Blepharophimosis‐Ptosis‐Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome, Dandy‐Walker …
    P Prasun, S Henry… (2025)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.64138 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.64138
    snippet: Wisconsin syndrome is a very rare genetic condition characterized by coarse facies, prominent nasal tip, bushy high arched/upsweeping eyebrows, and a full/everted lower lip. Deletion …
    abstract: Wisconsin syndrome is a very rare genetic condition characterized by coarse facies, prominent nasal tip, bushy high arched/upsweeping eyebrows, and a full/everted lower lip. Deletion of chromosome 3q24q25 region is considered critical for its manifestation. Deletion of the adjoining chromosome region 3q24 is associated with Dandy-Walker malformation, while 3q22.3 deletion is associated with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome. Here, we report an individual with chromosome 3q22.2-q26.2 interstitial deletion presenting with Wisconsin syndrome, blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome, Dandy-Walker malformation, Pierre Robin sequence, global developmental delays, and recurrent infections. This is the largest contiguous gene deletion reported in this region, and the combination of clinical features seen in this individual has not been reported before. Additionally, we propose that STAG1 is a candidate gene for recurrent infections in addition to cognitive impairment.

[5] Entry - #620985 - KARAYOL-BORROTO-HAGHSHENAS ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620985
    snippet: - Strabismus ... (2024) identified a total of 21 different heterozygous mutations in the MSL2 gene in 25 unrelated patients with Karayol-Borroto- ...

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pure.johnshopkins.edu/en/publications/msl2-variants-lead-to-a-neurodevelopmental-syndrome-with-lack-of-/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — 111, No. 7, 11.07.2024, p. 1330-1351. ... Karayol, Remzi ; Borroto, Maria Carla ; Haghshenas, Sadegheh et al. / MSL2 variants lead to a ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholars.duke.edu/individual/pub1633872
    snippet: Karayol, R; Borroto, MC; Haghshenas, S; Namasivayam, A; Reilly, J ... vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — Remzi Karayol ... To a lesser extent, seizures, CTD signs, sleep issues, vision problems, and other organ anomalies were also associated with MSL2 ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[9] Karayol-Borroto-Haghshenas Neurodevelopmental ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/karayol_borroto_haghshenas_neurodevelopmental_syndrome
    snippet: strabismus; myopia; downslanting palpebral fissures; deep set eyes. Neurologic ... MSL2. 4, Chromatin organization, GO:0006325, 1/498, 2. MSL2. 5, Protein ...

[10] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380990091_MSL2_variants_lead_to_a_neurodevelopmental_syndrome_with_lack_of_coordination_epilepsy_specific_dysmorphisms_and_a_distinct_episignature
    snippet: MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.