SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] SNUPN deficiency causes a recessive muscular dystrophy due to RNA mis-splicing and ECM dysregulation
    M Nashabat, N Nabavizadeh, HP Saraçoğlu… (2024)
    PMID:38413582 DOI:10.1038/s41467-024-45933-5 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-45933-5
    snippet: … SNURPORTIN-1, encoded by SNUPN, plays a central role in the nuclear import of … with atypical muscular dystrophy and neurological defects. Nine hypomorphic SNUPN biallelic …
    abstract: SNURPORTIN-1, encoded by SNUPN, plays a central role in the nuclear import of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins. However, its physiological function remains unexplored. In this study, we investigate 18 children from 15 unrelated families who present with atypical muscular dystrophy and neurological defects. Nine hypomorphic SNUPN biallelic variants, predominantly clustered in the last coding exon, are ascertained to segregate with the disease. We demonstrate that mutant SPN1 failed to oligomerize leading to cytoplasmic aggregation in patients' primary fibroblasts and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated mutant cell lines. Additionally, mutant nuclei exhibit defective spliceosomal maturation and breakdown of Cajal bodies. Transcriptome analyses reveal splicing and mRNA expression dysregulation, particularly in sarcolemmal components, causing disruption of cytoskeletal organization in mutant cells and patient muscle tissues. Our findings establish SNUPN deficiency as the genetic etiology of a previously unrecognized subtype of muscular dystrophy and provide robust evidence of the role of SPN1 for muscle homeostasis.

[2] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular dystrophy with myofibrillar-like features
    P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea, M Ioghen, S Bajew… (2024)
    PMID:38366623 DOI:10.1093/brain/awae046 https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: … families carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN, which encodes Snurportin-1, showing a LGMD … variants in SNUPN gene are the cause of a novel form of muscular dystrophy characterized …
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[3] SNUPN‐Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, Pathological and Functional Protein Insights
    N Muelas, P Iruzubieta, A Damborenea… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.70211 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.70211
    snippet: … SNUPN encodes for snurportin- 1, a protein implicated in the … Snurportin- 1 deficiency was shown to produce cytoplasmic … of SNUPN (NM_0011042581; c.79C>T, p.Arg27Cys and c.…
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[4] SNUPN variants cause spinocerebellar atrophy by disrupting global splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells
    M Okubo, M Ogawa, N Eura, YU Inoue, K Dewa, T Owa… (2026)
    PMID:41705730 DOI:10.1093/brain/awaf348 https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/149/3/1007/8483316
    snippet: … as a cause of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), with … variants in the SNUPN gene, which encodes snurportin-1, in three … studies linking SNUPN variants to muscular dystrophy, our …
    abstract: Mutations in the SNUPN gene, which encodes snurportin-1, a nuclear import adaptor for U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNP), have recently been implicated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, attributed to disrupted pre-messenger RNA splicing in skeletal muscle. U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins play a vital role in pre-messenger RNA splicing, a process essential for transcript fidelity and the regulation of gene expression across tissues. However, the impact of SNUPN mutations on the CNS remains unclear. We identified pathogenic variants in the SNUPN gene in two families with spinocerebellar atrophy. One patient exhibited mild changes in skeletal muscle, while the other did not. To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms, nuclear transport of the mutated snurpotin-1, and its interaction with importin beta were analysed in vitro. Then, we generated a knock-in mouse carrying the patients' variants and assessed its motor function and cerebellar morphology in vivo. Furthermore, we analysed U1 snRNP localization and RNA splicing in cerebellar Purkinje cells by both RNA- and single-cell RNA sequencing. Mutated snurportin-1 displayed impaired nuclear transport and reduced binding to importin beta. The knock-in mouse mimicking the compound heterozygous variants exhibited cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy and dendritic abnormalities in Purkinje cells. Abnormal RNA splicing and reduced expression were observed in many genes related to neuronal development and synaptic organization in Purkinje cells, leading to an immature cytoskeleton and reduced secretion of sonic hedgehog. The defects in Purkinje cells caused secondary abnormalities in granule cell migration and interneuron development. Our findings suggest that snurportin-1 plays a critical role in cerebellar development through U1 snRNP-mediated RNA processing and that its dysfunction may contribute to spinocerebellar ataxia. These results expand the clinical spectrum of SNUPN-related disorders beyond skeletal muscle and highlight splicing dysregulation as a potential mechanism underlying cerebellar atrophy.

[5] Cross-talk between snurportin1 subdomains
    JK Ospina, GB Gonsalvez, J Bednenko… (2005)
    PMID:16030253 DOI:10.1091/mbc.E05-04-0316 https://www.molbiolcell.org/doi/abs/10.1091/mbc.E05-04-0316
    snippet: The initial steps of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) maturation take place in the cytoplasm. After formation of an Sm-core and a trimethylguanosine (TMG) cap, the …
    abstract: The initial steps of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) maturation take place in the cytoplasm. After formation of an Sm-core and a trimethylguanosine (TMG) cap, the RNPs are transported into the nucleus via the import adaptor snurportin1 (SPN) and the import receptor importin-beta. To better understand this process, we identified SPN residues that are required to mediate interactions with TMG caps, importin-beta, and the export receptor, exportin1 (Xpo1/Crm1). Mutation of a single arginine residue within the importin-beta binding domain (IBB) disrupted the interaction with importin-beta, but preserved the ability of SPN to bind Xpo1 or TMG caps. Nuclear transport assays showed that this IBB mutant is deficient for snRNP import but that import can be rescued by addition of purified survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein complexes. Conserved tryptophan residues outside of the IBB are required for TMG binding. However, SPN can be imported into the nucleus without cargo. Interestingly, SPN targets to Cajal bodies when U2 but not U1 snRNPs are imported as cargo. SPN also relocalizes to Cajal bodies upon treatment with leptomycin B. Finally, we uncovered an interaction between the N- and C-terminal domains of SPN, suggesting an autoregulatory function similar to that of importin-alpha.

[6] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:38366623 DOI:10.1093/brain/awae046 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38366623/
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — ... muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[7] Biallelic variants in SNUPN cause a limb girdle muscular ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/147/8/2867/7608964
    snippet: by P Iruzubieta · 2024 · Cited by 9 — SNUPN gene encodes Snurportin-1 (NP_001036046), a 360-residue protein that ... SNUPN and display a muscular dystrophy phenotype. Patients showed ...
    abstract: Alterations in RNA-splicing are a molecular hallmark of several neurological diseases, including muscular dystrophies, where mutations in genes involved in RNA metabolism or characterized by alterations in RNA splicing have been described. Here, we present five patients from two unrelated families with a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) phenotype carrying a biallelic variant in SNUPN gene. Snurportin-1, the protein encoded by SNUPN, plays an important role in the nuclear transport of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), essential components of the spliceosome. We combine deep phenotyping, including clinical features, histopathology and muscle MRI, with functional studies in patient-derived cells and muscle biopsies to demonstrate that variants in SNUPN are the cause of a new type of LGMD according to current definition. Moreover, an in vivo model in Drosophila melanogaster further supports the relevance of Snurportin-1 in muscle. SNUPN patients show a similar phenotype characterized by proximal weakness starting in childhood, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and prominent contractures, although inter-individual variability in terms of severity even in individuals from the same family was found. Muscle biopsy showed myofibrillar-like features consisting of myotilin deposits and Z-disc disorganization. MRI showed predominant impairment of paravertebral, vasti, sartorius, gracilis, peroneal and medial gastrocnemius muscles. Conservation and structural analyses of Snurportin-1 p.Ile309Ser variant suggest an effect in nuclear-cytosol snRNP trafficking. In patient-derived fibroblasts and muscle, cytoplasmic accumulation of snRNP components is observed, while total expression of Snurportin-1 and snRNPs remains unchanged, which demonstrates a functional impact of SNUPN variant in snRNP metabolism. Furthermore, RNA-splicing analysis in patients' muscle showed widespread splicing deregulation, in particular in genes relevant for muscle development and splicing factors that participate in the early steps of spliceosome assembly. In conclusion, we report that SNUPN variants are a new cause of limb girdle muscular dystrophy with specific clinical, histopathological and imaging features, supporting SNUPN as a new gene to be included in genetic testing of myopathies. These results further support the relevance of splicing-related proteins in muscle disorders.

[8] Submission Details
    (authors not shown)
    https://thegencc.org/submissions/SGC-107183.2
    snippet: SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy with or without multi-system involvement. MONDO ... SNUPN encodes Snurportin 1, a nuclear import receptor essential for ...

[9] SNUPN-Related Muscular Dystrophy: Novel Phenotypic, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41054283/
    snippet: Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to ...
    abstract: <h4>Objective</h4>SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy or LGMDR29 is a new entity that covers from a congenital or childhood onset pure muscular dystrophy to more complex phenotypes combining neurodevelopmental features, cataracts, or spinocerebellar ataxia. So far, 12 different variants have been described. Here we report the first family with SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy presenting an adult-onset myopathy as well as novel ultrastructural findings.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical evaluation, muscle and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and muscle histopathological and electron microscopy analysis were conducted. Functional studies including protein modelling and interaction, immunofluorescence and splicing analysis were also performed.<h4>Results</h4>Two siblings carrying two novel deleterious variants in the SNUPN gene (p.Arg27Cys and p.Cys174Tyr) showed adult-onset proximo-distal and axial muscle weakness with early respiratory involvement. One patient presented with asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. Muscle MRI identified involvement in the paravertebral, triceps brachii, sartorius and gracilis muscles. The histopathology revealed dystrophic changes and an abnormal pattern of cytoskeletal and myofibrillar proteins, while electron microscopy disclosed the proliferation of granules and vesicles associated with features of nuclear envelope and sarcolemma remodelling. Functional studies showed that SNUPN variants impair snurportin-1 function through reduced binding affinity to importin-β and impaired folding, leading to disturbed nuclear import of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and downstream splicing.<h4>Interpretation</h4>Our work expands the phenotype of SNUPN-related muscular dystrophy and provides more insights into their pathological profile. We advise SNUPN testing in patients with late-onset proximo-distal and axial weakness with early respiratory impairment and features reminding inclusion body myositis (IBM). Granular deposits suggestive of biomolecular condensates perturbed cell organelle traffic and membrane homeostasis, opening new avenues to understand the pathomechanisms involved in this novel disease.

[10] Gene: SNUPN (Limb girdle muscular dystrophies ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/185/gene/SNUPN/
    snippet: phenotype characterised by early-onset proximal weakness, restrictive respiratory dysfunction and frequent contractures. SPN1 variant failed to oligomerize