SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Expanding the clinical and genetic spectrum of FDXR deficiency by functional validation of variants of uncertain significance
    SL Stenton, D Piekutowska‐Abramczuk… (2021)
    DOI:10.1002/humu.24160 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/humu.24160
    snippet: … years primarily in association with optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, … Physical examination revealed microcephaly, slight facial … CSF lactate, in addition to features frequent to FDXR …
    abstract: Ferrodoxin reductase (FDXR) deficiency is a mitochondrial disease described in recent years primarily in association with optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, and developmental delays. Here, we identified seven unpublished patients with FDXR deficiency belonging to six independent families. These patients show a broad clinical spectrum ranging from Leigh syndrome with early demise and severe infantile-onset encephalopathy, to milder movement disorders. In total nine individual pathogenic variants, of which seven were novel, were identified in FDXR using whole exome sequencing in suspected mitochondrial disease patients. Over 80% of these variants are missense, a challenging variant class in which to determine pathogenic consequence, especially in the setting of nonspecific phenotypes and in the absence of a reliable biomarker, necessitating functional validation. Here we implement an Arh1-null yeast model to confirm the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance in FDXR, bypassing the requirement for patient-derived material.

[2] Report of a case with ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) gene variants in a Chinese boy exhibiting hearing loss, visual impairment, and motor retardation
    C Yang, Y Zhang, J Li, Z Song, Z Yi, F Li… (2021)
    DOI:10.1002/jdn.10104 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jdn.10104
    snippet: … auditory neuropathy and optic atrophy as clinical features and … consisted of microcephaly, optic atrophy, seizures, global … Abnormal energy metabolism can lead to lactate accumulation …
    abstract: Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR), located in 17q25.1, encodes for a mitochondrial NADPH: adrenodoxin oxidoreductase or ferredoxin reductase, the sole human ferredoxin reductase involved in the biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters and heme formation. Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are involved in enzymatic catalysis, gene expression, and DNA replication and repair. Variants in FDXR lead to sensorial neuropathies, damage optic, and auditory neurons. Here, we report a Chinese boy with hearing loss, visual impairment, and motor retardation, with two novel compound heterozygous variants in FDXR (NM_004110), namely, c.250C > T (p.P84S) and c.634G > C (p.D212H), identified by whole-exome sequencing. Compared with the reported cases, except hearing loss and visual impairment, the clinical manifestations of this boy were more serious, who also had motor retardation and died in infancy after infection. The present study expands our knowledge of FDXR variants and related phenotypes, and provides new information on the genetic defects associated with this disease for clinical diagnosis.

[3] Mitochondrial biology and dysfunction in secondary mitochondrial disease
    MJ Baker, JJ Crameri, DR Thorburn, AE Frazier… (2022)
    PMC9727669 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9727669/
    snippet: … FDX2 and FDXR reduce sulfane to sulfide and finalize [2Fe-… , microcephaly, moderate elevation of plasma lactate levels, … , microcephaly, demyelination of brain matter, optic atrophy, …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases are a broad, genetically heterogeneous class of metabolic disorders characterized by deficits in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Primary mitochondrial disease (PMD) defines pathologies resulting from mutation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear genes affecting either mtDNA expression or the biogenesis and function of the respiratory chain. Secondary mitochondrial disease (SMD) arises due to mutation of nuclear-encoded genes independent of, or indirectly influencing OXPHOS assembly and operation. Despite instances of novel SMD increasing year-on-year, PMD is much more widely discussed in the literature. Indeed, since the implementation of next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques in 2010, many novel mitochondrial disease genes have been identified, approximately half of which are linked to SMD. This review will consolidate existing knowledge of SMDs and outline discrete categories within which to better understand the diversity of SMD phenotypes. By providing context to the biochemical and molecular pathways perturbed in SMD, we hope to further demonstrate the intricacies of SMD pathologies outside of their indirect contribution to mitochondrial energy generation.

[4] Human diseases associated with defects in assembly of OXPHOS complexes
    D Ghezzi, M Zeviani (2018)
    https://portlandpress.com/essaysbiochem/article-abstract/62/3/271/78542
    snippet: … one nonsense) mutations in SDHAF1 have been identified in affected subjects from six families, presenting with leukoencephalopathy; a peculiar hallmark was accumulation of lactate …
    abstract: The structural biogenesis and functional proficiency of the multiheteromeric complexes forming the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) require the concerted action of a number of chaperones and other assembly factors, most of which are specific for each complex. Mutations in a large number of these assembly factors are responsible for mitochondrial disorders, in most cases of infantile onset, typically characterized by biochemical defects of single specific complexes. In fact, pathogenic mutations in complex-specific assembly factors outnumber, in many cases, the repertoire of mutations found in structural subunits of specific complexes. The identification of patients with specific defects in assembly factors has provided an important contribution to the nosological characterization of mitochondrial disorders, and has also been a crucial means to identify a huge number of these proteins in humans, which play an essential role in mitochondrial bioenergetics. The wide use of next generation sequencing (NGS) has led to and will allow the identifcation of additional components of the assembly machinery of individual complexes, mutations of which are responsible for human disorders. The functional studies on patients' specimens, together with the creation and characterization of <i>in vivo</i> models, are fundamental to better understand the mechanisms of each of them. A new chapter in this field will be, in the near future, the discovery of mechanisms and actions underlying the formation of supercomplexes, molecular structures formed by the physical, and possibly functional, interaction of some of the individual respiratory complexes, particularly complex I (CI), III (CIII), and IV (CIV).

[5] Mitochondrial diseases: expanding the diagnosis in the era of genetic testing
    RP Saneto (2020)
    PMC7791531 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7791531/
    snippet: … and elevated serum or cerebrospinal fluid lactate[90]. Although the … Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) donates electrons from … in 2007 in a newborn with microcephaly and optic atrophy[256]. …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases are clinically and genetically heterogeneous. These diseases were initially described a little over three decades ago. Limited diagnostic tools created disease descriptions based on clinical, biochemical analytes, neuroimaging, and muscle biopsy findings. This diagnostic mechanism continued to evolve detection of inherited oxidative phosphorylation disorders and expanded discovery of mitochondrial physiology over the next two decades. Limited genetic testing hampered the definitive diagnostic identification and breadth of diseases. Over the last decade, the development and incorporation of massive parallel sequencing has identified approximately 300 genes involved in mitochondrial disease. Gene testing has enlarged our understanding of how genetic defects lead to cellular dysfunction and disease. These findings have expanded the understanding of how mechanisms of mitochondrial physiology can induce dysfunction and disease, but the complete collection of disease-causing gene variants remains incomplete. This article reviews the developments in disease gene discovery and the incorporation of gene findings with mitochondrial physiology. This understanding is critical to the development of targeted therapies.

[6] Fdxr | ferredoxin reductase mouse gene | IMPC
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.mousephenotype.org/data/genes/MGI:104724
    snippet: ... lactate, Secondary microcephaly, Polyneuropathy, Esotropia, Decreased distal ... Optic Atrophy-Ataxia-Peripheral Neuropathy-Global Developmental Delay Syndrome ...

[7] MT-TW (Optic Atrophy) - Gene
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp-aus.org/panels/149/gene/MT-TW/
    snippet: FDXR 1 ... Age of onset in affected individuals ranged from childhood to adulthood. Clinical features in affected individuals included LSS, microcephaly ... lactate ...

[8] Neuroimaging in FDXR-related mitochondriopathy
    A Lam, BD Beutler, SS Hegde, MJ Barkovich… (2026)
    DOI:10.1007/s00247-026-06734-8 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00247-026-06734-8
    snippet: … The clinical spectrum ranges from isolated sensorial … reveal a markedly elevated lactate peak affecting the basal … of recognizing FDXR-related mitochondriopathy as a cause of Leigh-…
    abstract: Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR)-related mitochondriopathy is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the FDXR gene. The clinical presentation is highly variable, ranging from isolated sensory neuropathies to severe infantile-onset encephalopathy with early demise. Neuroimaging is typically normal. However, oxidative stress in the setting of systemic infection can precipitate severe symptoms with distinct imaging manifestations, including confluent white matter signal abnormality, longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions, and optic nerve enhancement. We describe a previously healthy and asymptomatic 2-year-old female with genetically confirmed FDXR-related mitochondriopathy who was found to have a distinct pattern of diffusion restriction, rapid parenchymal atrophy, and optic nerve changes following a respiratory illness. Early recognition and management of this rare but potentially devastating entity can help prevent vision loss and improve functional outcomes.

[9] FDXR-associated disease: a challenging differential diagnosis with inflammatory peripheral neuropathy
    S Masnada, R Previtali, P Erba, E Beretta… (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10072-023-06790-0
    snippet: … or regression, pyramidal signs, microcephaly, and seizures in addition … review focused on the clinical spectrum of the disease. … clinical and radiological features fulfilling criteria for Leigh …
    abstract: <h4>Background and aims</h4>Mutations in FDXR gene, involved in mitochondrial pathway, cause a rare recessive neurological disorder with variable severity of phenotypes. The most common presentation includes optic and/or auditory neuropathy, variably associated to developmental delay or regression, global hypotonia, pyramidal, cerebellar signs, and seizures. The review of clinical findings in previously described cases from literature reveals also a significant incidence of sensorimotor peripheral polyneuropathy (22.72%) and ataxia (43.18%). To date, 44 patients with FDXR mutations have been reported. We describe here on two new patients, siblings, who presented with a quite different phenotype compared to previously described patients.<h4>Methods</h4>Clinical, neurophysiological, and genetic features of two siblings and a systematic literature review focused on the clinical spectrum of the disease are described.<h4>Results</h4>Both patients presented with an acute-sub-acute onset of peripheral neuropathy and only in later stages of the disease developed the typical features of FDXR-associated disease.<h4>Interpretation</h4>The peculiar clinical presentation at onset and the evolution of the disease in our patients and in some cases revised from the literature shed lights on a new possible phenotype of FDXR-associated disease: a peripheral neuropathy which can mimic an acute inflammatory disease.

[10] Riboflavin metabolism: role in mitochondrial function
    S Balasubramaniam, J Yaplito (2020)
    https://www.oaepublish.com/articles/jtgg.2020.34
    snippet: … Auditory neuropathy and optic atrophy FDXR … The recently described clinical spectrum for FAD synthase deficiency … The clinical manifestations included Leigh syndrome and infantile-…