SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Expanding the clinical and neuroimaging features of NKX6-2-related hereditary spastic ataxia type 8
    AH Bereshneh, S Hosseipour… (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S176972121930744X
    snippet: … type 8 due to a novel NKX6-2 mutation with peripheral neuropathy as a new clinical finding … axonal neuropathy in patients with hereditary spastic ataxia type 8 due to mutation in NKX6-2…
    abstract: Pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 gene causing autosomal recessive spastic ataxia type 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy have been reported in few families around the world. In this study, we performed Whole Exome Sequencing and identified a novel missense variant, c.501C > G; p.(Phe167Leu), in two affected siblings with main manifestations of global developmental delay, motor regression, hypotonia, clonus in lower limbs and muscle bulk atrophy especially in the upper limbs, spasticity and contracture, scoliosis, hip dislocation, oculomotor apraxia, horizontal and vertical nystagmus. In addition, wrist and foot drop due to peripheral axonal neuropathy were observed in these patients as a new clinical finding and cerebellar white matter involvement in brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) as new imaging finding. Therefore, we expanded the manifestations of NKX6-2-related disorders in this manuscript.

[2] A diagnostic approach to spastic ataxia syndromes
    JL Pedroso, TC Vale, MC França Junior, MA Kauffman… (2022)
    DOI:10.1007/s12311-021-01345-5 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12311-021-01345-5
    snippet: … ity and variable degrees of peripheral neuropathy, pes cavus and the … Patients with pathogenic variants in NKX6–2 gene develop … Axonal sensorimotor neuropathy is very common and …
    abstract: Spastic ataxia is characterized by the combination of cerebellar ataxia with spasticity and other pyramidal features. It is the hallmark of some hereditary ataxias, but it can also occur in some spastic paraplegias and acquired conditions. It often presents with heterogenous clinical features with other neurologic and non-neurological symptoms, resulting in complex phenotypes. In this review, the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxias are discussed and classified in accordance with inheritance. Establishing an organized classification method based on mode inheritance is fundamental for the approach to patients with these syndromes. For each differential, the clinical features, neuroimaging and genetic aspects are reviewed. A diagnostic approach for spastic ataxias is then proposed.

[3] Leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies in children
    C Sarret (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0035378718308336
    snippet: … in these disorders are due to axonal suffering, leading to … accompanied by mild peripheral neuropathy. The brain MRI … autosomal recessive mutations in the NKX6-2 gene, encoding an …
    abstract: Leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies are a large group of genetic disorders affecting central nervous system white matter. They can begin at any age, however this study focuses on disorders beginning in childhood and adolescence. We discuss the recent definitions, classifications, and classic syndromes, as well as genetic progress in the field through the identification of new genes and several new genetic syndromes.

[4] Glial origins of inherited white matter disorders
    A Sevagamoorthy, A Vanderver… (2025)
    https://cshperspectives.cshlp.org/content/17/7/a041457.short
    snippet: … nervous system (CNS) with or without peripheral neuropathy. They are classified either as … function or have secondary myelin defects due to neuronal/axonal dysfunction (van der …
    abstract: Inherited white matter disorders (IWMDs) are a phenotypically and genotypically heterogeneous group of disorders affecting the central nervous system (CNS) with or without peripheral neuropathy. They are classified either as leukodystrophies (LDs), with primary glial abnormalities, or genetic leukoencephalopathies (gLEs), where other CNS cells are involved. As a group, these disorders are common, with an incidence of 1 in 7500 births. However, IWMDs often go undiagnosed or suffer delayed or misdiagnosis due to their heterogeneous presentation. Many of these disorders present with lethal secondary manifestations that can be prevented through early disease recognition, periodic surveillance, and preventative management. Emerging therapeutics, including gene therapy trials for metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) and adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), suggest disease progression may be slowed or even prevented if treated early. Therapies for IWMDs that target glial cells or the peripheral immune system may provide novel insights for treating acquired disorders of white matter.

[5] An algorithmic approach to MR imaging of hypomyelinating leukodystrophies
    S Sharma, S Sundaram, C Kesavadas… (2025)
    PMID:39165110 DOI:10.1002/jmri.29558 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jmri.29558
    snippet: … Pathogenic variants in the NKX6-2 gene have been … and macular degeneration, peripheral neuropathy, global … of the axon and the total outer diameter of the myelinated axon. It …
    abstract: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) are a heterogeneous group of white matter diseases characterized by permanent deficiency of myelin deposition in brain. MRI is instrumental in the diagnosis and recommending genetic analysis, and is especially useful as many patients have a considerable clinical overlap, with the primary presenting complains being global developmental delay with psychomotor regression. Hypomyelination is defined as deficient myelination on two successive MR scans, taken at least 6 months apart, one of which should have been obtained after 1 year of age. Due to subtle differences in MRI features, the need for a systematic imaging approach to diagnose and classify hypomyelinating disorders is reiterated. The presented article provides an explicit review of imaging features of a myriad of primary and secondary HLDs, using state of the art genetically proven MR cases. A systematic pattern-based approach using MR features and specific clinical clues is illustrated for a quick yet optimal diagnosis of common as well as rare hypomyelinating disorders. The major MR features helping to narrow the differential diagnosis include extent of involvement like diffuse or patchy hypomyelination with selective involvement or sparing of certain white matter structures like optic radiations, median lemniscus, posterior limb of internal capsule and periventricular white matter; cerebellar atrophy; brainstem, corpus callosal or basal ganglia involvement; T2 hypointense signal of the thalami; and presence of calcifications. The authors also discuss the genetic and pathophysiologic basis of HLDs and recent methods to quantify myelin in vivo using advanced neuroradiology tools. The proposed algorithmic approach provides an improved understanding of these rare yet important disorders, enhancing diagnostic precision and improving patient outcomes. EVIDENCE LEVEL: 4 TECHNICAL EFFICACY: Stage 5.

[6] Expanding the clinical and neuroimaging features of NKX6 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S176972121930744X
    snippet: by AH Bereshneh · 2020 · Cited by 11 — Here in we present two additional cases of hereditary spastic Ataxia type 8 due to a novel NKX6-2 mutation with peripheral neuropathy as a new clinical ...
    abstract: Pathogenic variants in NKX6-2 gene causing autosomal recessive spastic ataxia type 8 with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy have been reported in few families around the world. In this study, we performed Whole Exome Sequencing and identified a novel missense variant, c.501C > G; p.(Phe167Leu), in two affected siblings with main manifestations of global developmental delay, motor regression, hypotonia, clonus in lower limbs and muscle bulk atrophy especially in the upper limbs, spasticity and contracture, scoliosis, hip dislocation, oculomotor apraxia, horizontal and vertical nystagmus. In addition, wrist and foot drop due to peripheral axonal neuropathy were observed in these patients as a new clinical finding and cerebellar white matter involvement in brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) as new imaging finding. Therefore, we expanded the manifestations of NKX6-2-related disorders in this manuscript.

[7] Peripheral axonal neuropathy (Concept Id: C1263857)
    (authors not shown)
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/266071
    snippet: ... axonal peripheral neuropathy. The lower limbs are predominantly affected ... Expanding the clinical and neuroimaging features of NKX6-2-related hereditary spastic ...

[8] NKX6-2 Disease in Two Unrelated Patients with Early- ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666459323000069
    snippet: by S Shurrab · 2023 · Cited by 4 — NKX6-2 Disease in Two Unrelated Patients with Early-Onset Spastic ... Peripheral neuropathy, N/A, Wrist drop (n=2) Foot drop (n=1) Peripheral axonal ...

[9] Mutations in nkx6-2 cause progressive spastic-ataxia and ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321467457_Mutations_in_nkx6-2_cause_progressive_spastic-ataxia_and_hypomyelination
    snippet: NKX6-2 by NKX6-1. 19. Although NKX6-2 deﬁciency causes. de ... axonal peripheral neuropathy in Iranian siblings. ... ... Adult ...
    abstract: Progressive limb spasticity and cerebellar ataxia are frequently found together in clinical practice and form a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are classified either as pure spastic ataxia or as complex spastic ataxia with additional neurological signs. Inheritance is either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive. Hypomyelinating features on MRI are sometimes seen with spastic ataxia, but this is usually mild in adults and severe and life limiting in children. We report seven individuals with an early-onset spastic-ataxia phenotype. The individuals come from three families of different ethnic backgrounds. Affected members of two families had childhood onset disease with very slow progression. They are still alive in their 30s and 40s and show predominant ataxia and cerebellar atrophy features on imaging. Affected members of the third family had a similar but earlier-onset presentation associated with brain hypomyelination. Using a combination of homozygozity mapping and exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to deleterious nonsense or homeobox domain missense mutations in NKX6-2. NKX6-2 encodes a transcriptional repressor with early high general and late focused CNS expression. Deficiency of its mouse ortholog results in widespread hypomyelination in the brain and optic nerve, as well as in poor motor coordination in a pattern consistent with the observed human phenotype. In-silico analysis of human brain expression and network data provides evidence that NKX6-2 is involved in oligodendrocyte maturation and might act within the same pathways of genes already associated with central hypomyelination. Our results support a non-redundant developmental role of NKX6-2 in humans and imply that NKX6-2 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spastic ataxia and hypomyelination.

[10] Spastic Ataxia (SPAX)
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/spastic_ataxia
    snippet: A hereditary ataxia that is characterized by early onset of cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal tract signs and peripheral neuropathy. ... NKX6-2, NK6 Homeobox 2 ...