SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] A genetic mimic of cerebral palsy: Homozygous NFU1 mutation with marked intrafamilial phenotypic variation
    TA Uzunhan, NE Çakar, S Seyhan, K Aydin (2020)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0387760420301911
    snippet: … spastic paraplegia phenotype that had not been reported to that point, which was associated with NFU1 in a 30-year-old patient with spastic paraplegia … genotype-phenotype correlation …
    abstract: <h4>Background</h4>Genetic defects in the NFU1, an iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein coding gene, which is vital in the final stage of assembly for iron sulfur proteins, have been defined as multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome I. This disorder is a severe autosomal recessive disease with onset in early infancy. It is characterized by disruption of the energy metabolism, resulting in weakness, neurological regression, hyperglycinemia, lactic acidosis, and early death.<h4>Patient description</h4>This report documents the case of a 27-month-old girl, who showed clinical signs and symptoms of spastic paraparesis with a relapsing-remitting course. The patient had a sister with a severe phenotype who died at the age of 16 months.<h4>Results</h4>Magnetic resonance imaging revealed hyperintensity of the cerebral white matter that was more prominent in the frontal regions, with milder involvement in the posterior periventricular regions. There was also evidence of partial cystic degeneration and cavitation in the frontal regions. In addition, she had hyperglycinemia. Homozygous NM_001002755.4:c.565G>A (p.Gly189Arg) mutation was identified in the NFU1 gene; this had not previously been reported as homozygous.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Hyperglycinemia and cavitating leukodystrophy are suggestive of an NFU1 mutation diagnosis. An intrafamilial phenotypic variation has not been published in NFU1-associated disorders before. Presenting with spasticity as a rare phenotype, NFU1 mutations could be considered a genetic mimic of cerebral palsy.

[2] A Case of Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 1 and Review of the Literature
    CR DiFalco, A Williams, C Soler‐Alfonso… (2026)
    DOI:10.1002/ajmg.a.70213 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajmg.a.70213
    snippet: … variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We … of autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia with certain … accurately ascertain true genotype– phenotype correlations. …
    abstract: Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1, MIM #605711) due to NFU1 gene defects is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism associated with reduced function of NFU1 iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) scaffold protein. This disorder demonstrates variable clinical features including hypotonia, epileptic encephalopathy, respiratory failure, lactic acidosis, hyperglycinemia, and hemodynamic instability. One unique feature of this mitochondrial disorder is the common manifestation of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), for which the pathophysiologic mechanism is not well defined to date. Here, we report a case of infantile-onset lactic acidosis, refractory epilepsy with encephalopathy, hyperglycinemia, and severe PAH in a patient who underwent rapid genome sequencing (GS) which identified compound heterozygous variants in NFU1 consistent with a diagnosis of MMDS1. We additionally review the literature on published cases of MMDS1 including developments in the understanding of the intracellular impact of defective ISC proteins. Recent studies delineate a multifactorial pathogenesis including globally dysregulated energy metabolism, specific deficiencies in oxidative phosphorylation, and excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. A key difference between established animal models of this disorder and human cases published to date is that the previously described sex-based phenotype discrepancy in rats was not recapitulated in this review. Identification of the clinical combination of lactic acidosis, PAH, and hyperglycinemia during diagnostic evaluation should raise suspicion for a defect of the ISC pathway, and further investigations of the cellular pathophysiology of this disorder may provide insight into the phenotypic spectrum of human disease and potential therapeutic targets.

[3] Children with suspected hereditary spastic paraplegia clearly benefit from whole exome analysis
    D Safka Brozkova, J Paulasova Schwabova… (2026)
    PMID:41749354 DOI:10.1186/s40246-026-00935-w https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s40246-026-00935-w
    snippet: … NFU1, reported presentations range from severe multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1… -onset pure or complex hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) with prolonged …
    abstract: BACKGROUND: Establish a genetic diagnosis in patients referred for clinical suspicion of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). The cohort of 134 paediatric patients was divided into three groups according to age at symptom onset: group A (0–5 years, n = 82), group B (5–10 years, n = 32), and group C (10–18 years, n = 20). Exome sequencing was followed by virtual panel evaluation of HSP associated genes. In patients with a negative result, full exome evaluation was subsequently performed. RESULTS: We established the genetic diagnosis in 31% of patients across all the groups, representing 41 index patients from 41 unrelated families. In the group A, the diagnostic yield increased by up to one-third when panel analysis was followed by full exome analysis, reaching 37%. In group B, 18% of patients were diagnosed using either a virtual panel or a combination of virtual panel and exome analysis. In group C, panel testing alone provided a 25% yield, with no additional benefit from exome evaluation. We confirmed 10 de novo variants comprising 19% of all detected variants, and except for one, all were detected in the group A. In the majority of solved patients, the diagnosis of HSP was confirmed by the detection of a pathogenic variant in an HSP-associated gene. However, in 32% of cases, the final diagnosis corresponded to a different rare neurological disorder, caused by a pathogenic variant in a gene associated with a condition other than HSP. Among the genetically solved patients with HSP our data suggest that autosomal dominant forms (82%) may be more common than autosomal recessive forms (18%) in paediatric patients in the Czech Republic. CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated that exome sequencing with virtual panel evaluation, followed by analysis of the full exome data according to HPO terms, is the most suitable approach, particularly for young paediatric patients.

[4] A review of multiple mitochondrial dysfunction syndromes, syndromes associated with defective Fe-S protein maturation
    E Lebigot, M Schiff, MP Golinelli (2021)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9059/9/8/989
    snippet: … in NFU1 [64] with a more drastic effect in homozygous female rats. However, this dimorphism gender was not evident in patients with MMDS1. … -like phenotype (spastic paraplegia, optic …

[5] Mitochondrial biology and dysfunction in secondary mitochondrial disease
    MJ Baker, JJ Crameri, DR Thorburn, AE Frazier… (2022)
    PMC9727669 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9727669/
    snippet: … on to other proteins (such as NFU1 or BOLA3) to target more … in SPG7 contribute to hereditary spastic paraplegia type 7 (SPG7… be explained by genotype-phenotype correlation, in which …
    abstract: Mitochondrial diseases are a broad, genetically heterogeneous class of metabolic disorders characterized by deficits in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Primary mitochondrial disease (PMD) defines pathologies resulting from mutation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear genes affecting either mtDNA expression or the biogenesis and function of the respiratory chain. Secondary mitochondrial disease (SMD) arises due to mutation of nuclear-encoded genes independent of, or indirectly influencing OXPHOS assembly and operation. Despite instances of novel SMD increasing year-on-year, PMD is much more widely discussed in the literature. Indeed, since the implementation of next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques in 2010, many novel mitochondrial disease genes have been identified, approximately half of which are linked to SMD. This review will consolidate existing knowledge of SMDs and outline discrete categories within which to better understand the diversity of SMD phenotypes. By providing context to the biochemical and molecular pathways perturbed in SMD, we hope to further demonstrate the intricacies of SMD pathologies outside of their indirect contribution to mitochondrial energy generation.

[6] Patient-specific variants of NFU1/NFU-1 disrupt cholinergic ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:36645076 DOI:10.1242/dmm.049594 PMC9922734 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9922734/
    snippet: by PA Kropp · 2023 · Cited by 1 — ... MMDS1 patients is compound heterozygous for different NFU1 variants. ... New spastic paraplegia phenotype associated to mutation of NFU1. Orphanet J ...
    abstract: Neuromuscular dysfunction is a common feature of mitochondrial diseases and frequently presents as ataxia, spasticity and/or dystonia, all of which can severely impact individuals with mitochondrial diseases. Dystonia is one of the most common symptoms of multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1), a disease associated with mutations in the causative gene (NFU1) that impair iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. We have generated Caenorhabditis elegans strains that recreated patient-specific point variants in the C. elegans ortholog (nfu-1) that result in allele-specific dysfunction. Each of these mutants, Gly147Arg and Gly166Cys, have altered acetylcholine signaling at neuromuscular junctions, but opposite effects on activity and motility. We found that the Gly147Arg variant was hypersensitive to acetylcholine and that knockdown of acetylcholine release rescued nearly all neuromuscular phenotypes of this variant. In contrast, we found that the Gly166Cys variant caused predominantly postsynaptic acetylcholine hypersensitivity due to an unclear mechanism. These results are important for understanding the neuromuscular conditions of MMDS1 patients and potential avenues for therapeutic intervention.

[7] Reported patients with MMDS type 1.
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Reported-patients-with-MMDS-type-1_tbl1_353817332
    snippet: For NFU1, reported presentations range from severe multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 1 (MMDS1) ... genes: NFU1 ... spastic paraplegia 74 phenotype, ...

[8] Phenotypic continuum of NFU1‐related disorders
    R Kaiyrzhanov, MS Zaki, T Lau, S Sen… (2022)
    DOI:10.1002/acn3.51679 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acn3.51679
    snippet: … complex hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) phenotype with a … MMDS1 and HSP could be the two ends of the NFU1-related … The residual PDH activity and the normal KGDHC activity in …

[9] Role of Nfu1 and Bol3 in iron-sulfur cluster transfer to mitochondrial clients
    A Melber, U Na, A Vashisht, BD Weiler, R Lill… (2016)
    PMID:27532773 DOI:10.7554/elife.15991 https://elifesciences.org/articles/15991
    snippet: … that mimics the MMDS1 patient allele, which displayed a severe synthetic sick phenotype on glycerol/… Fe/S protein assembly gene IBA57 mutation causes hereditary spastic paraplegia. …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are essential for many cellular processes, ranging from aerobic respiration, metabolite biosynthesis, ribosome assembly and DNA repair. Mutations in NFU1 and BOLA3 have been linked to genetic diseases with defects in mitochondrial Fe-S centers. Through genetic studies in yeast, we demonstrate that Nfu1 functions in a late step of [4Fe-4S] cluster biogenesis that is of heightened importance during oxidative metabolism. Proteomic studies revealed Nfu1 physical interacts with components of the ISA [4Fe-4S] assembly complex and client proteins that need [4Fe-4S] clusters to function. Additional studies focused on the mitochondrial BolA proteins, Bol1 and Bol3 (yeast homolog to human BOLA3), revealing that Bol1 functions earlier in Fe-S biogenesis with the monothiol glutaredoxin, Grx5, and Bol3 functions late with Nfu1. Given these observations, we propose that Nfu1, assisted by Bol3, functions to facilitate Fe-S transfer from the biosynthetic apparatus to the client proteins preventing oxidative damage to [4Fe-4S] clusters.

[10] Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis and neurological disorders
    A Selvanathan, BP Sankaran (2022)
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567724921001446
    snippet: … -allelic deleterious changes in NFU1. The initial reported phenotype was three siblings who all … Examination showed spastic paraparesis and optic atrophy. She had hyperglycinaemia, …
    abstract: Iron-sulfur clusters (ISCs) are highly conserved moieties embedded into numerous crucial proteins in almost all bacteria, plants and mammals. As such, ISC biosynthesis is critical to cellular function. The pathway was first characterized in bacteria by the late 1990s, and over the subsequent 20 years there has been increasing understanding of its components in humans. Defects in the ISC pathway are now associated with many different human disease states, such as Friedreich ataxia and ISCU myopathy. Whilst the disorders have variable clinical features, most involve neurological phenotypes. There are common biochemical signatures in most of these conditions, as a lack of ISCs causes deficiencies of target proteins including Complex I, II and III, aconitase and lipoic acid. This review focuses on the disorders of ISC biogenesis that have been described in the literature to-date. Key clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological features will be discussed, providing a reference point for clinicians diagnosing and managing these patients. Therapies are mostly supportive at this stage. However, the improved understanding of the pathophysiology of these conditions could pave the way for disease-modifying therapies in the near future.