SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction
    D Braunholz, M Hullings, MC Gil (2012)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/ejhg2011175
    snippet: … with deletions or truncating mutations of NIPBL … phenotypes from these defined domains to assess the dependence of NIPBL–MAU2 binding in the determination of human phenotype. …
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; or Brachmann-de Lange syndrome) is a dominantly inherited congenital malformation disorder with features that include characteristic facies, cognitive delays, growth retardation and limb anomalies. Mutations in nearly 60% of CdLS patients have been identified in NIPBL, which encodes a regulator of the sister chromatid cohesion complex. NIPBL, also known as delangin, is a homolog of yeast and amphibian Scc2 and C. elegans PQN-85. Although the exact mechanism of NIPBL function in sister chromatid cohesion is unclear, in vivo yeast and C. elegans experiments and in vitro vertebrate cell experiments have demonstrated that NIPBL/Scc2 functionally interacts with the MAU2/Scc4 protein to initiate loading of cohesin onto chromatin. To test the significance of this model in the clinical setting of CdLS, we fine-mapped the NIBPL-MAU2 interaction domain and tested the functional significance of missense mutations and variants in NIPBL and MAU2 identified in these minimal domains in a cohort of patients with CdLS. We demonstrate that specific novel mutations at the N-terminus of the MAU2-interacting domain of NIBPL result in markedly reduced MAU2 binding, although we appreciate no consistent clinical difference in the small group of patients with these mutations. These data suggest that factors in addition to MAU2 are essential in determining the clinical features and severity of CdLS.

[2] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 underlie a distinct Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-026-71177-6
    snippet: … More recently, a second individual carrying a missense … the molecular and phenotypic consequences of MAU2 variants. … the functional consequences of truncating MAU2 variants. To …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[3] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 lead to a new Cornelia de Lange Syndrome subtype
    I Parenti, A Hesters, M Gil (2025)
    PMC12668068 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12668068/
    snippet: … interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 … More recently, a second individual carrying a missense … the molecular and phenotypic consequences of MAU2 variants. Our …
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While  NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of  MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous  MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. MAU2 in-frame variants predominantly impair NIPBL–MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause  MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most patients exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also identified two  MAU2 -specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as consistent features. A heterozygous  Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulated these traits, confirming the causal role of  MAU2 disruption  in vivo. Our study establishes  MAU2 as a new CdLS-associated gene and delineates a  MAU2 -related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[4] MAU2 and NIPBL variants impair the heterodimerization of the cohesin loader subunits and cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome
    I Parenti, F Diab, SR Gil, E Mulugeta, V Casa, R Berutti… (2020)
    https://www.cell.com/cell-reports/fulltext/S2211-1247(20)30600-8
    snippet: … truncated NIPBL that would not require MAU2 for its stability. … first genetic variant in MAU2 causing a CdLS phenotype. The … the deletion in MAU2 and the NIPBL missense mutation are …
    abstract: The NIPBL/MAU2 heterodimer loads cohesin onto chromatin. Mutations in NIPBL account for most cases of the rare developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Here we report a MAU2 variant causing CdLS, a deletion of seven amino acids that impairs the interaction between MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus. Investigating this interaction, we discovered that MAU2 and the NIPBL N terminus are largely dispensable for normal cohesin and NIPBL function in cells with a NIPBL early truncating mutation. Despite a predicted fatal outcome of an out-of-frame single nucleotide duplication in NIPBL, engineered in two different cell lines, alternative translation initiation yields a form of NIPBL missing N-terminal residues. This form cannot interact with MAU2, but binds DNA and mediates cohesin loading. Altogether, our work reveals that cohesin loading can occur independently of functional NIPBL/MAU2 complexes and highlights a novel mechanism protective against out-of-frame mutations that is potentially relevant for other genetic conditions.

[5] MAU2 and NIPBL variants in Cornelia de Lange syndrome reveal MAU2-independent loading of cohesin and uncover a protective mechanism against early truncating …
    I Parenti, F Diab, SR Gil, E Mulugeta, V Casa, R Berutti… (2018)
    DOI:10.1101/477752.abstract https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/477752.abstract
    snippet: … In this paper, we describe the first mutation in MAU2 that results in a CdLS phenotype. Similarly to the aforementioned missense mutations in NIPBL, the p.(Gln310_Ala316del) variant …

[6] Pathogenic variants in the cohesin loader subunit MAU2 ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://scholarlyexchange.childrensmercy.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=8223&context=papers
    snippet: Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity. Cornelia de Lange ...
    abstract: The role of the cohesin complex depends on the cohesin loader proteins NIPBL and MAU2. While NIPBL variants are a major cause of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), the role of MAU2 in disease is unclear. We describe 18 individuals carrying 15 heterozygous MAU2 variants and demonstrate pathogenicity through functional analyses. In-frame MAU2 variants predominantly impair NIPBL-MAU2 interaction, whereas truncating variants cause MAU2 haploinsufficiency and lead to NIPBL reduction. Most individuals exhibit a DNA methylation profile compatible with the CdLS episignature. We also describe two MAU2-specific episignatures that reflect variant-dependent molecular consequences. Affected individuals display a wide range of phenotypes, from classic CdLS to milder presentations, with short stature and microcephaly as major features. A heterozygous Mau2 knockout mouse model recapitulates these traits, confirming the causal role of MAU2 disruption in vivo. Our study establishes MAU2 as a CdLS-associated gene and delineates a MAU2-related chromatinopathy with variable expressivity.

[7] MAU2 and NIPBL variants in Cornelia de Lange syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1101/477752v1.full-text https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/477752v1.full-text
    snippet: MAU2 and NIPBL variants in Cornelia de Lange syndrome reveal MAU2-independent loading of cohesin and uncover a protective mechanism against ...

[8] Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC3283175 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3283175/
    snippet: by D Braunholz · 2011 · Cited by 42 — Isolated NIBPL missense mutations that cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome alter MAU2 interaction · INTRODUCTION. CdLS · MATERIALS AND METHODS.
    abstract: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; or Brachmann-de Lange syndrome) is a dominantly inherited congenital malformation disorder with features that include characteristic facies, cognitive delays, growth retardation and limb anomalies. Mutations in nearly 60% of CdLS patients have been identified in NIPBL, which encodes a regulator of the sister chromatid cohesion complex. NIPBL, also known as delangin, is a homolog of yeast and amphibian Scc2 and C. elegans PQN-85. Although the exact mechanism of NIPBL function in sister chromatid cohesion is unclear, in vivo yeast and C. elegans experiments and in vitro vertebrate cell experiments have demonstrated that NIPBL/Scc2 functionally interacts with the MAU2/Scc4 protein to initiate loading of cohesin onto chromatin. To test the significance of this model in the clinical setting of CdLS, we fine-mapped the NIBPL-MAU2 interaction domain and tested the functional significance of missense mutations and variants in NIPBL and MAU2 identified in these minimal domains in a cohort of patients with CdLS. We demonstrate that specific novel mutations at the N-terminus of the MAU2-interacting domain of NIBPL result in markedly reduced MAU2 binding, although we appreciate no consistent clinical difference in the small group of patients with these mutations. These data suggest that factors in addition to MAU2 are essential in determining the clinical features and severity of CdLS.

[9] Cornelia de Lange syndrome as paradigm of chromatinopathies
    I Parenti, FJ Kaiser (2021)
    DOI:10.3389/fnins.2021.774950/full https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2021.774950/full
    snippet: Chromatinopathies can be defined as a class of neurodevelopmental disorders caused by mutations affecting proteins responsible for chromatin remodeling and transcriptional regulation. The resulting dysregulation of gene expression favors the onset of a series of clinical features such as developmental delay, intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism, and behavioral disturbances. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a prime example of a chromatinopathy. It is caused by mutations affecting subunits or regulators of the cohesin …

[10] CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME AND RELATED DISORDERS: NEW INSIGHTS INTO GLOBAL TRANSCRIPTIONAL DISTURBANCES DUE TO MUTATIONS IN …
    I Parenti (2016)
    https://tesidottorato.depositolegale.it/handle/20.500.14242/75793
    snippet: Abstract Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare disorder characterized by an extensive clinical heterogeneity. The main features of the syndrome are characteristic facial dysmorphisms and a variable level of intellectual disability, growth retardation and developmental delay. Though, the number and severity of the clinical signs vary among patients. An extensive genetic heterogeneity partially accounts for the reported clinical variability. Mutations in different cohesin-associated proteins are in fact responsible for the …