SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] Systematic analysis of homozygous autosomal copy number losses in exomes improves diagnostic yield and uncovers ultra-rare recessive disorders
    A Chaurasia, A Shukla, S Pande… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02158-y
    snippet: … Our work provides evidence to support the existence of FILIP1-related arthrogryposis with … , usually resulting in hypotonia and secondary joint contractures, and dysmorphic facial …
    abstract: Systematic analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) in large datasets is challenging, and there are limited studies of homozygous copy number losses in rare disease exomes. Here, we leveraged the genomic uniqueness and relative under-representation of the Indian population in the current public genomic databases and identified 42,386 possible homozygous losses (median 20 per individual) in a heterogeneous cohort of 2021 individuals with suspected Mendelian disorders, who had undergone exome sequencing using 12 different capture kits in a resource-limited setting. Employing a genomic position loss-count-based approach, we filtered 1224 rare homozygous loss calls in 718 individuals (median 1 per individual) for further analysis, thus significantly reducing the analysis burden. Clinical correlation and validation of these rare calls enabled 10 new diagnoses in 240 unsolved individuals. This led to a two-fold increase in diagnosis owing to homozygous deletions. Further analysis of the data and identification of additional affected individuals through collaboration led to identification of biallelic FILIP1 and FAM177A1 variants as causes of a syndromic arthrogryposis and a neuromuscular disorder respectively. Both conditions were recently reported as ultra-rare recessive disorders, thus validating our approach. We also show that biallelic loss-of-function TFCP2L1 variants cause chronic kidney disease and VPS36 variants cause a severe recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by microcephaly, motor delay, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar atrophy, seizures, hypotonia, spasticity and early death. Overall, these results demonstrate a scalable approach to screen homozygous losses for improving diagnostic yield and discovering disease-genes in large exome cohorts.

[2] FILIP1-associated neuromuscular disorder and phenotypic blending due to paternal UPD6
    LM Watts, DJ Bunyan, E Giacopuzzi… (2024)
    https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article-abstract/6/5/fcae330/7774821
    snippet: … Additional clinical features included flexion contractures, scoliosis, facial hypotonia and … with arthrogryposis as the recruited condition, and 229 individuals with congenital contractures …

[3] The diagnostic yield, candidate genes, and pitfalls for a genetic study of intellectual disability in 118 middle eastern families
    G Al (2022)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-22036-z
    snippet: … Severe phenotypes causing death within the neonatal or early infantile period were also included as a neurological phenotype was evident, such as seizures, hypotonia, or brain …
    abstract: Global Developmental Delay/Intellectual disability (ID) is the term used to describe various disorders caused by abnormal brain development and characterized by impairments in cognition, communication, behavior, or motor skills. In the past few years, whole-exome sequencing (WES) has been proven to be a powerful, robust, and scalable approach for candidate gene discoveries in consanguineous populations. In this study, we recruited 215 patients affected with ID from 118 Middle Eastern families. Whole-exome sequencing was completed for 188 individuals. The average age at which WES was completed was 8.5 years. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were detected in 32/118 families (27%). Variants of uncertain significance were seen in 33/118 families (28%). The candidate genes with a possible association with ID were detected in 32/118 (27%) with a total number of 64 affected individuals. These genes are novel, were previously reported in a single family, or cause strikingly different phenotypes with a different mode of inheritance. These genes included: AATK, AP1G2, CAMSAP1, CCDC9B, CNTROB, DNAH14, DNAJB4, DRG1, DTNBP1, EDRF1, EEF1D, EXOC8, EXOSC4, FARSB, FBXO22, FILIP1, INPP4A, P2RX7, PRDM13, PTRHD1, SCN10A, SCYL2, SMG8, SUPV3L1, TACC2, THUMPD1, XPR1, ZFYVE28. During the 5 years of the study and through gene matching databases, several of these genes have now been confirmed as causative of ID. In conclusion, understanding the causes of ID will help understand biological mechanisms, provide precise counseling for affected families, and aid in primary prevention.

[4] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review from a Neuromuscular Standpoint
    DD Seneor, JP Barile, PM Mendes, M Orsini… (2026)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/17/6/675
    snippet: … may present with severe hypotonia, respiratory distress, and multiple contractures, whereas later … More recently, FILIP1 loss-of-function variants were identified as a cause of AMC, with …

[5] Homozygous loss-of-function variants in FILIP1 cause autosomal recessive arthrogryposis multiplex congenita with microcephaly
    F Schnabel, E Schuler, A Al (2023)
    DOI:10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-023-02528-2
    snippet: … In addition, he presented with muscular hypotonia… contractures in our patient cohort. In summary, we provide clinical and genetic evidence that bi-allelic deleterious variants in the FILIP1 …
    abstract: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita forms a broad group of clinically and etiologically heterogeneous disorders characterized by congenital joint contractures that involve at least two different parts of the body. Neurological and muscular disorders are commonly underlying arthrogryposis. Here, we report five affected individuals from three independent families sharing an overlapping phenotype with congenital contractures affecting shoulder, elbow, hand, hip, knee and foot as well as scoliosis, reduced palmar and plantar skin folds, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous truncating variants in FILIP1 in all patients. FILIP1 is a regulator of filamin homeostasis required for the initiation of cortical cell migration in the developing neocortex and essential for the differentiation process of cross-striated muscle cells during myogenesis. In summary, our data indicate that bi-allelic truncating variants in FILIP1 are causative of a novel autosomal recessive disorder and expand the spectrum of genetic factors causative of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.

[6] FILIP1 (Arthrogryposis) - Gene
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/258/gene/FILIP1/
    snippet: Arg889Ter) gene and presenting with distal arthrogryposis with contractures of the knees and elbows, congenital clubfoot, muscular hypotonia, and mild learning ...

[7] Bi-allelic variants of FILIP1 cause congenital myopathy, dysmorphism and neurological defects
    A Roos, PFM van der Ven, H Alrohaif, H Kölbel, L Heil… (2023)
    https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-abstract/146/10/4200/7159317
    snippet: … Hypotonia, delayed achievement of motor milestones, … of the FILIP1 gene and associated phenotypic features comprise … and elbow, knee and finger contractures and may also have …
    abstract: Filamin-A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) is a structural protein that is involved in neuronal and muscle function and integrity and interacts with FLNa and FLNc. Pathogenic variants in filamin-encoding genes have been linked to neurological disorders (FLNA) and muscle diseases characterized by myofibrillar perturbations (FLNC), but human diseases associated with FILIP1 variants have not yet been described. Here, we report on five patients from four unrelated consanguineous families with homozygous FILIP1 variants (two nonsense and two missense). Functional studies indicated altered stability of the FILIP1 protein carrying the p.[Pro1133Leu] variant. Patients exhibit a broad spectrum of neurological symptoms including brain malformations, neurodevelopmental delay, muscle weakness and pathology and dysmorphic features. Electron and immunofluorescence microscopy on the muscle biopsy derived from the patient harbouring the homozygous p.[Pro1133Leu] missense variant revealed core-like zones of myofibrillar disintegration, autophagic vacuoles and accumulation of FLNc. Proteomic studies on the fibroblasts derived from the same patient showed dysregulation of a variety of proteins including FLNc and alpha-B-crystallin, a finding (confirmed by immunofluorescence) which is in line with the manifestation of symptoms associated with the syndromic phenotype of FILIP1opathy. The combined findings of this study show that the loss of functional FILIP1 leads to a recessive disorder characterized by neurological and muscular manifestations as well as dysmorphic features accompanied by perturbed proteostasis and myopathology.

[8] The evolving genetic landscape of neuromuscular fetal akinesias
    G Haliloğlu, G Ravenscroft (2025)
    PMID:40356365 DOI:10.1177/22143602251339357 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/22143602251339357
    snippet: … phenotype and designated as congenital contractures of the limbs and face with hypotonia … Prevalence of multiple congenital contractures including arthrogryposis multiplex congenita …
    abstract: Fetal akinesia is a broad term used to describe absent (or reduced, fetal hypokinesia) fetal movements, and it can be detected as early as the first trimester. Depending on the developmental age of onset, anything that interferes or limits the normal <i>in utero</i> movement results in a range of deformations affecting multiple organs and organ systems. Arthrogryposis, also termed arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC), is a definitive terminology for multiple congenital contractures, with two major subgroups; amyoplasia and distal arthrogryposis (DA). The spectrum includes fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS), lethal congenital contracture syndrome (LCCS), and multiple pterygium syndrome (MPS). Variants in more than >400 genes are known to cause AMC, and it is increasingly recognized that variants in genes encoding critical components (including ventral horn cell, peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction, skeletal muscle) of the extended motor unit underlie ∼40% of presentations. With unbiased screening approaches, including sequencing of comprehensive disease gene panels, exomes and genomes, novel genes and phenotypic expansions associated with known human disease genes have been uncovered in the setting of fetal akinesia. Autosomal-recessive titinopathy is the most frequent genetic cause of AMC. Accurate genetic diagnosis is critical to genetic counseling and informing family planning. Around 50% remain undiagnosed following comprehensive prenatal, diagnostic or research screening. Comprehensive phenotyping and periodic reanalysis with appropriate genomic tools are valuable strategies when faced with initial inconclusive results. There are likely many novel causative genes still to identify, which will inform our understanding of the molecular pathways underlying early human development and <i>in utero</i> movement.

[9] Entry - #620775 - NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDER, ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620775
    snippet: Congenital neuromuscular disorder with dysmorphic facies (NMDF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by impaired skeletal muscle ...

[10] Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita: Comprehensive Review ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC13300424 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC13300424/
    snippet: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a diverse group of conditions characterized by multiple joint contractures. Although individually rare, these ...