SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] KDM2B variants in the CxxC domain impair its DNA-binding ability and cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, MA Hadders… (2025)
    https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article-abstract/34/16/1353/8150966
    snippet: … phenotypic characteristics specifically attributable to CxxC … of cardiac and renal ultrasound in each KDM2B-CxxC patient, … KDM2B variants with a maximum allele frequency < 0.001 …
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[2] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B‐Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder and the 12q24. 31 Microdeletion Syndrome
    ASE van Oirsouw, TC Hsieh, M Koetsier… (2026)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cge.70169
    snippet: … renal and ocular abnormalities (OMIM # 621474) [14]. … In summary, these findings point to a KDM2B CxxC distinct … The asterisk * indicates to interpret the frequency of KDM2B pLOF …
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[3] Epigenetic modifiers: activities in renal cell carcinoma
    AA De Cubas, WK Rathmell (2018)
    PMID:30030490 DOI:10.1038/s41585-018-0052-7 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41585-018-0052-7
    snippet: … function is emphasized by the high frequency of PBRM1 missense mutations in ccRCC19,… activity of KDM2B, which specifically targets nonmethylated CpG islands via its CXXC domain…
    abstract: Renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) are a diverse set of malignancies that have recently been shown to harbour mutations in a number of chromatin modifier genes - including PBRM1, SETD2, BAP1, KDM5C, KDM6A, and MLL2 - through high-throughput sequencing efforts. Current research focuses on understanding the biological activities that chromatin modifiers employ to suppress tumorigenesis and on developing clinical approaches that take advantage of this knowledge. Unsurprisingly, several common themes unify the functions of these epigenetic modifiers, particularly regulation of histone post-translational modifications and nucleosome organization. Furthermore, chromatin modifiers also govern processes crucial for DNA repair and maintenance of genomic integrity as well as the regulation of splicing and other key processes. Many chromatin modifiers have additional non-canonical roles in cytoskeletal regulation, which further contribute to genomic stability, expanding the repertoire of functions that might be essential in tumorigenesis. Our understanding of how mutations in chromatin modifiers contribute to tumorigenesis in RCC is improving but remains an area of intense investigation. Importantly, elucidating the activities of chromatin modifiers offers intriguing opportunities for the development of new therapeutic interventions in RCC.

[4] Lysine-specific histone demethylases contribute to cellular differentiation and carcinogenesis
    G Verde, J Querol (2017)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4655/1/1/4
    snippet: … In addition, KDM2B could act as a critical epigenetic factor … Under hypoxia conditions, KDM3A increases renal and colon … ) through its Zn-finger CxxC DNA-binding domain, where it can …

[5] TET proteins in malignant hematopoiesis
    SMC Langemeijer, MG Aslanyan, JH Jansen (2009)
    PMID:19923888 DOI:10.4161/cc.8.24.10239 https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.4161/cc.8.24.10239
    snippet: … Thus, CXXC proteins may function as modifiers that can … Ndy1/KDM2B immortalizes mouse embryonic fibroblasts by … CXXC4 promotes a malignant phenotype in renal cell carcinoma by …

[6] KDM2B variants in the CxxC domain impair its DNA-binding ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC12361114 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12361114/
    snippet: by ASE van Oirsouw · 2025 · Cited by 3 — Based on our findings, we recommend a baseline workup of cardiac and renal ultrasound in each KDM2B-CxxC patient, and early developmental ...
    abstract: Rare variants affecting the epigenetic regulator KDM2B cause a recently delineated neurodevelopmental disorder. Interestingly, we previously identified both a general KDM2B-associated episignature and a subsignature specific to variants in the DNA-binding CxxC domain. In light of the existence of a distinct subsignature, we set out to determine if KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism. We recruited individuals with heterozygous CxxC variants and assessed the variants' effect on protein expression and DNA-binding ability. We analyzed clinical data from 19 individuals, including ten previously undescribed individuals with seven novel CxxC variants. The core phenotype of the KDM2B-CxxC cohort is more extensive as compared to that of individuals with KDM2B haploinsufficiency. All individuals with CxxC variants presented with developmental delay, mainly in the speech and motor domain, in addition to variable intellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism. Congenital heart defects were observed in up to 78% of individuals, with additional common findings including musculoskeletal, ophthalmological, and urogenital anomalies, as well as behavioral challenges and feeding difficulties. Functional assays revealed that while mutant KDM2B protein with CxxC variants can be expressed in vitro, its DNA-binding ability is significantly reduced compared to wildtype. This study shows that KDM2B CxxC variants cause a distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome, possibly through a molecular mechanism different from haploinsufficiency.

[7] Entry - *609078 - LYSINE DEMETHYLASE 2B; KDM2B
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/609078
    snippet: Neurodevelopmental disorder with congenital cardiac defects and variable renal and ocular abnormalities ... KDM2B gene that occurred outside of the CxxC domain.

[8] (PDF) KDM2B ‐Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder A ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/399151551_KDM2B_-Related_Neurodevelopmental_Disorder_A_Case-Series_Supporting_the_CxxC_Domain_Phenotype_With_Emphasis_on_Ocular_and_Dermatologic_Features
    snippet: ... renal anomalies is warranted, but. the absence of a ... KDM2B CxxC variants are associated with a unique phenotype and disease mechanism.

[9] Comprehensive Assessment of the KDM2B-Associated ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMID:41954311 DOI:10.1111/cge.70169 https://pure.eur.nl/files/252768044/Comprehensive_Assessment_of_the_KDM2B-Associated_Neurodevelopmental_Disorder_and_the_12q24.31_Microdeletion_Syndrome.pdf
    snippet: by ASE van Oirsouw · 2026 — Notably, variants affecting the CxxC domain are associated with a distinct NDD with congenital car- diac defects and variable renal and ocular ...
    abstract: The recently delineated KDM2B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) is characterized by developmental delay and variable co-morbidity. Genotype-phenotype correlations are emerging, in particular a distinct clinical presentation caused by CxxC domain variants. We report here a novel intragenic deletion which leads to in vitro expression of a shortened KDM2B protein lacking the complete CxxC domain. In addition, we present data on 12 other individuals; two with larger 12q24.31 microdeletions, one with a frameshift variant, and nine with missense variants. We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations of this cohort combined with previously reported individuals (n = 68) and classify 37 variants in 47 individuals as pathogenic or likely pathogenic. We observe a highly penetrant CxxC-related phenotype with distinct facial features supported by GestaltMatcher. In contrast, our findings point to variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of loss-of-function variants and JmjC domain variants complicating variant classification and genetic counseling. We identify KDM2B as a strong contributor to the 12q24.31 microdeletion syndrome, while also addressing the role of additional genes in the region. Thus, our study defines the KDM2B-NDD's clinical spectrum and highlights the importance of integrating molecular, (epi)genetic, and phenotypic data in NDD diagnostics.

[10] Variants in the CxxC domain of the epigenetic regulator KDM2B support its role in developmental eye anomalies
    F Ceroni, LM Reis, F Watkins, DA Bax… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02090-1
    snippet: … neurodevelopmental disorder… congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B…
    abstract: KDM2B encodes an epigenetic regulator that binds to promoter-associated CpG islands via its CxxC zinc-finger domain, protecting them from DNA methylation. It also helps establish transcriptional programs essential for development by recruiting the non-canonical Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.1 to lineage-specific genes. Heterozygous variants in KDM2B were recently associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Notably, some individuals with variants in the CxxC domain also exhibited congenital heart, kidney and/or structural eye anomalies. By screening 706 families with developmental eye disorders, we identified two cases with KDM2B-CxxC variants, NM_032590.5:c.1841G>C;p.(Arg614Pro) and NM_032590.5:c.1880G>C;p.(Cys627Ser), both resulting in a characteristic KDM2B DNA episignature. Both individuals exhibited complex structural eye defects, with neurodevelopmental, cardiac and renal anomalies variably present. These cases strengthen the association between KDM2B-CxxC variants and eye, kidney and heart malformations and highlight the importance of testing this gene and its episignature in individuals with structural eye disorders, especially when accompanied by congenital cardiac and/or renal anomalies.