SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] O-GlcNAc transferase congenital disorder of glycosylation (OGT-CDG): Potential mechanistic targets revealed by evaluating the OGT interactome
    JM Mayfield, NL Hitefield, I Czajewski, L Vanhye… (2024)
    https://www.jbc.org/article/S0021-9258(24)02100-8/fulltext
    snippet: … causal for the intellectual disability (ID) symptoms seen in … and developmental delay, often impacting their speech and … The OGT interactor TAF4 (60) has recently been associated with a …
    abstract: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is the sole enzyme responsible for the post-translational modification of O-GlcNAc on thousands of target nucleocytoplasmic proteins. To date, nine variants of OGT that segregate with OGT Congenital Disorder of Glycosylation (OGT-CDG) have been reported and characterized. Numerous additional variants have been associated with OGT-CDG, some of which are currently undergoing investigation. This disorder primarily presents with global developmental delay and intellectual disability (ID), alongside other variable neurological features and subtle facial dysmorphisms in patients. Several hypotheses aim to explain the etiology of OGT-CDG, with a prominent hypothesis attributing the pathophysiology of OGT-CDG to mutations segregating with this disorder disrupting the OGT interactome. The OGT interactome consists of thousands of proteins, including substrates as well as interactors that require noncatalytic functions of OGT. A key aim in the field is to identify which interactors and substrates contribute to the primarily neural-specific phenotype of OGT-CDG. In this review, we will discuss the heterogenous phenotypic features of OGT-CDG seen clinically, the variable biochemical effects of mutations associated with OGT-CDG, and the use of animal models to understand this disorder. Furthermore, we will discuss how previously identified OGT interactors causal for ID provide mechanistic targets for investigation that could explain the dysregulated gene expression seen in OGT-CDG models. Identifying shared or unique altered pathways impacted in OGT-CDG patients will provide a better understanding of the disorder as well as potential therapeutic targets.

[2] X-exome sequencing of 405 unresolved families identifies seven novel intellectual disability genes
    H Hu, SA Haas, J Chelly, H Van Esch, M Raynaud… (2016)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/mp2014193
    snippet: … age of 17 years presented with significant developmental delay, the absence of speech and autism … ATN1 (known ID protein) interacts with TAF4 and negatively regulates transcription of …
    abstract: X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder. During the past two decades in excess of 100 X-chromosome ID genes have been identified. Yet, a large number of families mapping to the X-chromosome remained unresolved suggesting that more XLID genes or loci are yet to be identified. Here, we have investigated 405 unresolved families with XLID. We employed massively parallel sequencing of all X-chromosome exons in the index males. The majority of these males were previously tested negative for copy number variations and for mutations in a subset of known XLID genes by Sanger sequencing. In total, 745 X-chromosomal genes were screened. After stringent filtering, a total of 1297 non-recurrent exonic variants remained for prioritization. Co-segregation analysis of potential clinically relevant changes revealed that 80 families (20%) carried pathogenic variants in established XLID genes. In 19 families, we detected likely causative protein truncating and missense variants in 7 novel and validated XLID genes (CLCN4, CNKSR2, FRMPD4, KLHL15, LAS1L, RLIM and USP27X) and potentially deleterious variants in 2 novel candidate XLID genes (CDK16 and TAF1). We show that the CLCN4 and CNKSR2 variants impair protein functions as indicated by electrophysiological studies and altered differentiation of cultured primary neurons from Clcn4(-/-) mice or after mRNA knock-down. The newly identified and candidate XLID proteins belong to pathways and networks with established roles in cognitive function and intellectual disability in particular. We suggest that systematic sequencing of all X-chromosomal genes in a cohort of patients with genetic evidence for X-chromosome locus involvement may resolve up to 58% of Fragile X-negative cases.

[3] Genome sequencing reveals high diagnostic yield in children with severe sporadic developmental language disorder
    MGP Kennis, L van Haaften, K van Hulst… (2026)
    https://www.nature.com/articles/s41431-026-02214-7
    snippet: … TAF4 is associated with a developmental disorder (OMIM #620450), characterized by intellectual disability… associated with developmental delay. Am J Med Genet A. 2016;170a:1325–9. …
    abstract: A developmental language disorder (DLD) is a neurobiological condition characterized by impaired language development despite adequate linguistic input and normal intelligence. The role of monogenic causes in the pathogenesis of DLD is largely unknown and diagnostic genetic testing is rarely offered. This study assessed the diagnostic yield of genome sequencing in severe DLD and investigated the underlying genetic foundations. We designed a prospective cohort study involving trio-based genome sequencing in 25 individuals (aged 3-25 years) with severe DLD, no intellectual disability (non-verbal IQ ≥ 70), no autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and no first-degree family history of DLD or neurodevelopmental disorders. (Likely) pathogenic variants were found in nine of 25 individuals, reflecting a molecular diagnostic yield of 36%. The genetic causes were diverse and involved seven autosomal dominant disorders, one autosomal recessive disorder, and one sex chromosome aneuploidy. In seven individuals, the disease-causing variant occurred de novo. All identified (likely) pathogenic variants were located in genes or loci that have been previously implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders with variable clinical presentations. Importantly, the genetic diagnosis provided actionable insights for counselling and clinical follow-up for all nine individuals. This study reveals a high prevalence of rare (mainly de novo) genetic variants in individuals with severe and sporadic DLD, and demonstrates extensive molecular overlap with other neurodevelopmental disorders. Our results support the implementation of routine trio-based genetic testing in individuals with severe and sporadic DLD.

[4] Genomic landscape of rare variants in a Chinese autism cohort and discovery of novel risk genes
    S Tan, Y Lyu, X Sun, R Guo, X Zhang, Z Song… (2026)
    PMID:42463903 DOI:10.1038/s41380-026-03754-6 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-026-03754-6
    snippet: … indels from the largest cohorts with developmental delay to visualize the de novo variants (… ’ tag from Gene Curation Expert Panel of intellectual disability (ID) and autism, epilepsy, …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a genetically complex neurodevelopmental condition with a high heritability. However, genomic studies of ASD have been underrepresented in East Asian populations, and the molecular yield in ASD cohorts remains modest. Here, we present a whole-genome sequencing analysis of 3109 samples across 1033 Chinese ASD families. By examining a wide spectrum of genetic variation, we identified rare ASD-associated variants in 19.2% of affected individuals, providing a population-specific view of the genetic architecture of ASD. We identify significant enrichment of de novo variants in probands, nominate or strengthen candidate risk genes (e.g., NCL, SPPL3, ADGRB1, SLC9A3, KIF1B) through mutational burden, evolutionary constraint, recurrent missense site, and functional assays, and implicate convergent pathways including protein palmitoylation. By integrating over 40,000 ASD cases across unpublished and published global cohorts, we identify 245 ASD risk genes, including 45 with limited prior evidence and 32 with no prior association. Single-cell transcriptomic profiling of the developing human cortex reveals that ASD risk genes exhibit widespread yet heterogeneous expression across all major cell types, with peak expression in excitatory neurons, particularly intratelencephalic neurons, and enriched expression in microglia (e.g., C1QC, CARD11, SNX13, MEF2C, FOXP2, TCF12, MED13L), suggesting convergent involvement of both synaptic and neuroimmune mechanisms. Together, our findings expand the ASD genetic landscape and suggest convergent pathogenic axes involving transcriptional regulation, synaptic signaling and plasticity, and neuroimmune interactions. This work supports the development of inclusive diagnostic strategies and provides a foundation for mechanistic and intervention exploration in ASD.

[5] A gene-to-patient approach uplifts novel disease gene discovery and identifies 18 putative novel disease genes
    EG Seaby, D Smedley, ALT Tavares, H Brittain… (2022)
    PMID:35532742 DOI:10.1016/j.gim.2022.04.019 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360022007481
    snippet: … , global developmental delay, delayed gross motor development, intellectual disability N/A … ANKRD12 Splice acceptor Absent Intellectual disability, global developmental delay N/A …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Exome and genome sequencing have drastically accelerated novel disease gene discoveries. However, discovery is still hindered by myriad variants of uncertain significance found in genes of undetermined biological function. This necessitates intensive functional experiments on genes of equal predicted causality, leading to a major bottleneck.<h4>Methods</h4>We apply the loss-of-function observed/expected upper-bound fraction metric of intolerance to gene inactivation to curate a list of predicted haploinsufficient disease genes. Using data from the 100,000 Genomes Project, we adopt a gene-to-patient approach that matches de novo loss-of-function variants in constrained genes to patients with rare disease. Through large-scale aggregation of data, we reduce excess analytical noise currently hindering novel discoveries.<h4>Results</h4>Results from 13,949 trios revealed 643 rare, de novo predicted loss-of-function events filtered from 1044 loss-of-function observed/expected upper-bound fraction-constrained genes. A total of 168 variants occurred within 126 genes without a known disease-gene relationship. Of these, 27 genes had >1 kindred affected, and for 18 of these genes, multiple kindreds had overlapping phenotypes. Two years after initial analysis, 11 of 18 (61%) of these genes have been independently published as novel disease gene discoveries.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Using large cohorts and adopting gene-based approaches can rapidly and objectively accelerate dominantly inherited novel gene discovery by targeting the most appropriate genes for functional validation.

[6] Intellectual Developmental Disorder, Autosomal Dominant 73
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.malacards.org/card/intellectual_developmental_disorder_autosomal_dominant_73
    snippet: An autosomal dominant disorder characterized by intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe, developmental delay, speech delay, behavioral abnormalities ...

[7] 620450 - INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://omim.org/entry/620450
    snippet: TAF4-RELATED NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER; T4ND TAF4-RELATED NDD. Phenotype ... - Developmental delay [SNOMEDCT: 224958001, 248290002] [ICD10CM: F88] ...

[8] Intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal dominant 73
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.uniprot.org/diseases/DI-06716
    snippet: An autosomal dominant disorder characterized by intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe, developmental delay, speech delay, behavioral abnormalities ...

[9] TAF4
    (authors not shown)
    https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/entities/TAF4
    snippet: TAF4-related neurodevelopmental disorder; Developmental delay. Green TAF4 in Intellectual disability. Level 2: Developmental disorders. Version 10.85. Latest ...

[10] TAF8-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder - NCBI - NIH
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/taf8-ndd/
    snippet: by TCF Zaccai · 2025 — Developmental delay / intellectual disability, 8/8 (100%), Typically ... De novo putative loss-of-function variants in TAF4 are associated with a ...
    abstract: <h4>Clinical characteristics</h4>TAF8-related neurodevelopmental disorder (TAF8-NDD) is characterized by brain malformations, microcephaly, severe-to-profound global developmental delays, and often epilepsy. Clinical features may present initially in utero with fetal growth restriction and possibly brain anomalies seen on prenatal imaging. TAF8-NDD is a progressive neurodegenerative condition, with progressive global cerebral and cerebellar atrophy and grossly enlarged ventricles. Both gray and white matter are affected. Motor development is severely impaired in all affected individuals, initially marked by axial hypotonia in infancy, followed by progressive spasticity of the upper and lower limbs during childhood and adolescence. Clinically, this progression is characterized by increasing spasticity, a reduction in spontaneous movements, and the development of epilepsy in most individuals. No reported affected individual has achieved the ability to sit independently, ambulate, or use verbal language skills. All affected individuals have severe-to-profound intellectual disability. Other reported features include developmental regression, severe visual impairment, and feeding difficulties (dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux disease) that may warrant placement of a feeding tube.<h4>Diagnosis/testing</h4>The diagnosis of TAF8-NDD is established in a proband with suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in TAF8 identified by molecular genetic testing.<h4>Management</h4>Treatment of manifestations: Standardized treatment with anti-seizure medication by an experienced neurologist for epilepsy. Feeding therapy for poor growth with low threshold for gastrostomy tube placement for persistent feeding issues and/or dysphagia. Standard treatment for developmental delay / intellectual disability, spasticity, contractures, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and low vision. Surveillance: At each visit, measurement of growth parameters; evaluation of nutritional status and safety of oral intake; monitor for signs/symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease, evidence of aspiration, and respiratory insufficiency; monitor for new manifestations such as seizures, changes in tone, and regression of skills; monitor developmental progress and educational needs; and assess mobility. Two to three years after original brain MRI, consider repeat brain MRI to assess for evidence of cerebral atrophy. Ophthalmology evaluation per treating clinician.<h4>Genetic counseling</h4