SOURCES (the only material you may cite; copy locators exactly):

[1] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with lack of coordination, epilepsy, specific dysmorphisms, and a distinct episignature
    R Karayol, MC Borroto, S Haghshenas… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(24)00164-2
    snippet: … , missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and phenotypes … In summary, methylated signal intensity was divided by the sum of methylated and …
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[2] Nonrandom occurrence of multiple de novo coding variants in a proband indicates the existence of an oligogenic model in autism
    Y Du, Z Li, Z Liu, N Zhang, R Wang, F Li, T Zhang… (2020)
    PMID:31332282 DOI:10.1038/s41436-019-0610-2 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41436-019-0610-2
    snippet: … ASD proband with a severe clinical phenotype in a cohort of … insertion in USP54 and damaging missense DNVs in … disorders or phenotypes related to neurodevelopment. In addition, …
    abstract: <h4>Purpose</h4>Elucidating the genetic architecture underlying autism spectrum disorder (ASD) will aid in the understanding of its genetic etiology and clinical diagnosis.<h4>Methods</h4>A comprehensive set of coding de novo variants (DNVs) from 4504 trios with ASD and 3012 control/sibling trios from several large-scale sequencing studies were collected and combined. Multiple in-depth analyses including DNVs burden, clinical phenotypes, and functional networks underlying the combined data set were used to evaluate the nonrandom occurrence of multiple extreme DNVs (loss-of-function and damaging missense variants) in the same patients.<h4>Results</h4>We observed a significant excess of multiple extreme DNVs among patients with ASD compared with controls. Meanwhile, patients with ASD carrying 2+ extreme DNVs had significantly lower IQs than patients carrying 0 or 1 DNV. Moreover, much closer functional connectivity than expected was observed among 2 or more genes with extreme DNVs from the same individuals. In particular, we identified 56 key genes as more confident ASD genes compared with other known ASD genes. In addition, we detected 23 new ASD candidate genes with recurrent DNVs, including VIP, ZWILCH, MSL2, LRRC4, and CAPRIN1.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our findings present compelling statistical evidence supporting an oligogenic model and provide new insights into the genetic architecture of ASD.

[3] Systematic analysis of variants escaping nonsense-mediated decay uncovers candidate Mendelian diseases
    RI Torene, MJG Sacoto, F Millan, Z Zhang… (2024)
    https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(23)00402-0
    snippet: … leading to a more severe or distinct phenotype from NMD(þ) … Frameshift and missense variants in HDAC2 and MSL2 have … individuals with NDD similar to the missense individuals. (B) …
    abstract: Protein-truncating variants (PTVs) near the 3' end of genes may escape nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). PTVs in the NMD-escape region (PTVescs) can cause Mendelian disease but are difficult to interpret given their varying impact on protein function. Previously, PTVesc burden was assessed in an epilepsy cohort, but no large-scale analysis has systematically evaluated these variants in rare disease. We performed a retrospective analysis of 29,031 neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) parent-offspring trios referred for clinical exome sequencing to identify PTVesc de novo mutations (DNMs). We identified 1,376 PTVesc DNMs and 133 genes that were significantly enriched (binomial p < 0.001). The PTVesc-enriched genes included those with PTVescs previously described to cause dominant Mendelian disease (e.g., SEMA6B, PPM1D, and DAGLA). We annotated ClinVar variants for PTVescs and identified 948 genes with at least one high-confidence pathogenic variant. Twenty-two known Mendelian PTVesc-enriched genes had no prior evidence of PTVesc-associated disease. We found 22 additional PTVesc-enriched genes that are not well established to be associated with Mendelian disease, several of which showed phenotypic similarity between individuals harboring PTVesc variants in the same gene. Four individuals with PTVesc mutations in RAB1A had similar phenotypes including NDD and spasticity. PTVesc mutations in IRF2BP1 were found in two individuals who each had severe immunodeficiency manifesting in NDD. Three individuals with PTVesc mutations in LDB1 all had NDD and multiple congenital anomalies. Using a large-scale, systematic analysis of DNMs, we extend the mutation spectrum for known Mendelian disease-associated genes and identify potentially novel disease-associated genes.

[4] Targeted sequencing and integrative analysis to prioritize candidate genes in neurodevelopmental disorders
    Y Zhang, T Wang, Y Wang, K Xia, J Li, Z Sun (2021)
    DOI:10.1007/s12035-021-02377-y https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12035-021-02377-y
    snippet: … highlighted MSL2, which carried two de novo protein-truncating … Multiple phenotype-genotype correlation studies have revealed … gene (PLXNA3) carrying a novel hemizygous missense …
    abstract: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a group of diseases characterized by high heterogeneity and frequently co-occurring symptoms. The mutational spectrum in patients with NDDs is largely incomplete. Here, we sequenced 547 genes from 1102 patients with NDDs and validated 1271 potential functional variants, including 108 de novo variants (DNVs) in 78 autosomal genes and seven inherited hemizygous variants in six X chromosomal genes. Notably, 36 of these 78 genes are the first to be reported in Chinese patients with NDDs. By integrating our genetic data with public data, we prioritized 212 NDD candidate genes with FDR < 0.1, including 17 novel genes. The novel candidate genes interacted or were co-expressed with known candidate genes, forming a functional network involved in known pathways. We highlighted MSL2, which carried two de novo protein-truncating variants (p.L192Vfs*3 and p.S486Ifs*11) and was frequently connected with known candidate genes. This study provides the mutational spectrum of NDDs in China and prioritizes 212 NDD candidate genes for further functional validation and genetic counseling.

[5] The evolving landscape of functional models of autism spectrum disorder
    J Ranjan, A Bhattacharya (2025)
    https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4409/14/12/908
    snippet: … variants (SNVs), missense or protein truncating, as well as … MSL2 Biallelic expression of dosage sensitive genes, … utero or are born with severe encephalopathy and do not survive …
    abstract: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1-3% of the population globally. Owing to its multifactorial origin, complex genetics, and heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes, it is difficult to faithfully model ASD. In essence, ASD is an umbrella term for a group of individually rare disorders, each risk gene accounting for <1% of cases, threaded by a set of overlapping behavioral or molecular phenotypes. Validated behavioral tests are considered a gold standard for ASD diagnosis, and several animal models (rodents, pigs, and non-human primates) have traditionally been used to study its molecular basis. These models recapitulate the human phenotype to a varying degree and have been indispensable to preclinical research, but they cannot be used to study human-specific features such as protracted neuronal maturation and cell-intrinsic attributes, posing serious limitations to translatability. Human stem cell-based models, both as monolayer 2D cultures and 3D organoids and assembloids, can circumvent these limitations. Generated from a patient's own reprogrammed cells, these can be used for testing therapeutic interventions that are more condition and patient relevant, targeting developmental windows where the intervention would be most effective. We discuss some of these advancements by comparing traditional and recent models of ASD.

[6] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with ...
    (authors not shown)
    PMC11267526 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11267526/
    snippet: by R Karayol · 2024 · Cited by 16 — Here we describe 25 individuals with heterozygous, missense, or protein-truncating variant alleles in MSL2, delineating genotypes and phenotypes ...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[7] MSL2 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome ...
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380990091_MSL2_variants_lead_to_a_neurodevelopmental_syndrome_with_lack_of_coordination_epilepsy_specific_dysmorphisms_and_a_distinct_episignature
    snippet: ... MSL2. One missense variant, p ... Novel protein-truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental...
    abstract: Epigenetic dysregulation has emerged as an important etiological mechanism of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Pathogenic variation in epigenetic regulators can impair deposition of histone post-translational modifications leading to aberrant spatiotemporal gene expression during neurodevelopment. The male-specific lethal (MSL) complex is a prominent multi-subunit epigenetic regulator of gene expression and is responsible for histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac). Using exome sequencing, here we identify a cohort of 25 individuals with heterozygous de novo variants in MSL complex member MSL2. MSL2 variants were associated with NDD phenotypes including global developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and motor issues such as coordination problems, feeding difficulties, and gait disturbance. Dysmorphisms and behavioral and/or psychiatric conditions, including autism spectrum disorder, and to a lesser extent, seizures, connective tissue disease signs, sleep disturbance, vision problems, and other organ anomalies, were observed in affected individuals. As a molecular biomarker, a sensitive and specific DNA methylation episignature has been established. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from three members of our cohort exhibited reduced MSL2 levels. Remarkably, while NDD-associated variants in two other members of the MSL complex (MOF and MSL3) result in reduced H4K16ac, global H4K16ac levels are unchanged in iPSCs with MSL2 variants. Regardless, MSL2 variants altered the expression of MSL2 targets in iPSCs and upon their differentiation to early germ layers. Our study defines an MSL2-related disorder as an NDD with distinguishable clinical features, a specific blood DNA episignature, and a distinct, MSL2-specific molecular etiology compared to other MSL complex-related disorders.

[8] Prenatal Diagnosis of MSL2‐Related Ventriculomegaly in ...
    (authors not shown)
    DOI:10.1111/cge.70071 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cge.70071
    snippet: ... missense ... Although both anomalies are known to cause neurodevelopmental disorders, ventriculomegaly has so far only been associated with MSL2 ...
    abstract: The Male-Specific Lethal 2 Homolog (MSL2) gene was recently reported to be responsible for a novel, rather severe neurodevelopmental syndrome including brain abnormalities. We report the first prenatal case of an MSL2-related pathology caused by a de novo MSL2 splice variant (c.142+1G>T). RNA study on amniotic fluid cells showed an intronic inclusion and frameshift, consistent with loss-of-function intolerance. The fetus, who presented with bilateral moderate ventriculomegaly, also carried a paternally inherited 15q13 microduplication. Brain MRI at 2 and 4 months of age showed stable, mildly enlarged lateral ventricles. Clinical evaluation at 11 months revealed only a mild developmental delay. This case illustrates the challenges in predicting the postnatal outcome of recently characterized syndromes with limited documented cases, especially in association with a second independent genetic anomaly. Follow-up will be crucial to better define the developmental impact of this first reported MSL2 splice mutation in combination with the 15q13 microduplication, and characterization of more patients with MSL2 mutations will contribute to expanding the phenotypic spectrum.

[9] Publications
    (authors not shown)
    https://www.baylorgenetics.com/publications/
    snippet: ... truncating variants of a chromatin-modifying gene MSL2 in syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders · Read More. July 1, 2024. Homozygous missense variants in YKT6 ...

[10] Analysis methods for diagnosing rare neurodevelopmental diseases with episignatures: a systematic review of the literature
    A Alegret (2025)
    PMID:41463054 DOI:10.3390/biomedicines13123043 https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9059/13/12/3043
    snippet: … confirmed cases of the suspected disease for comparison. … to a specific disease class. This approach does not require … , while preserving key phenotypic differences (ie, ensuring that …
    abstract: <b>Background:</b> Rare diseases (RDs) and neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) remain under-researched due to their low prevalence, leaving significant gaps in diagnostic strategies. Beyond next-generation sequencing, epigenetic profiling and particularly episignatures have emerged as a promising complementary diagnostic tool and for reclassifying variants of uncertain significance (VUS). However, clinical implementation remains limited, hindered by non-standardized methodologies and restricted data sharing that impede the development of sufficiently large datasets for robust episignature development. <b>Methods:</b> We conducted a systematic literature review following PRISMA 2020 guidelines to identify all studies reporting episignatures published between 2014 and 2025. The review summarizes methodological approaches used for episignature detection and implementation, as well as reports of epimutations. <b>Results:</b> A total of 108 studies met the inclusion criteria. All but three employed Illumina methylation arrays, mostly 450 K and EPIC versions for patient sample analysis. Three main methodological phases were identified: data quality control, episignature detection, and classification model training. Despite methodological variability across these stages, most studies demonstrated high predictive capabilities, often relying on methodologies developed by a small number of leading groups. <b>Conclusions:</b> Epigenetic screening has significant potential to improve diagnostic yield in RDs and NDDs. Continued methodological refinement and collaborative standardization efforts will be crucial for its successful integration into clinical practice. Nevertheless, key challenges persist, including the need for secure and ethical data-sharing frameworks, external validation, and methodological standardization.